Freedom
Justice
Honesty

Introduction

A Message From Charles Kennedy MP,
Leader of the Liberal Democrats 

Three simple words. Freedom, Justice, Honesty. These sum up what the Liberal Democrats stand for. Freedom - because everybody should have the opportunity to make the most of their life. Justice - because freedom depends on fairness. Honesty - because where fairness has a cost, like investing in schools, hospitals and pensions, we explain how it will be paid for.

This manifesto sets out our priorities: investing in schools and hospitals to cut class sizes and waiting times; extra police to prevent crime and catch criminals; increasing the basic state pension; and providing free personal care.

In Scotland, where Liberal Democrats are part of the government, we have already guaranteed free personal care. We have also abolished tuition fees, and we want to do this for the rest of the United Kingdom.

We will also recognise the professionalism of teachers, doctors, nurses and the police, valuing their contribution to the community. We believe that they must be given the freedom to exercise their professional judgement.

All our policies have a green dimension. So there is an environmental section in every chapter, a green thread binding together all our thinking. Without steps to preserve our planet for future generations, none of our other policies would have much purpose.

A Real Chance for Real Change

The United Kingdom has huge potential. Unlock the energies, skills and talents of its people, and its rich ethnic and cultural diversity, and there is nothing that cannot be achieved.

But we do not want government always telling people how to develop those assets. So in this manifesto every section explains how we want government to stop interfering.

Government works best as an enabler. Its task is not to curb but to stimulate. To enjoy true freedom, people must have good education, decent healthcare, reliable public transport, safety on the streets and a secure income in old age. The state must provide these basic public services to allow all its citizens to achieve their full potential.

Under eighteen years of Conservative government, these freedoms steadily diminished. The sick waited longer for operations. Children were taught in larger and larger classes. Rail passengers suffered the consequences of a disastrous privatisation. Crime rose. Pensioners' incomes fell behind.
But Labour has been disappointing, sticking quite unnecessarily for two years to Tory spending limits. Our programme for government will deliver more. For schools, hospitals, pensioners, the police and the environment, we offer Britain a real chance for real change. 

 
 
In addition to viewing the manifesto on-line, you can purchase your own copy here (cost is £2 each incl P+P). Copies are also available in large print and on tape from 4 Cowley Street, London, SW1P 3NB, 020 7222 7999.
This manifesto contains federal Liberal Democrat policy, except in areas where policy of the Scottish or Welsh Liberal Democrats applies. Separate manifestos set out our agenda for Scotland and Wales. Guarantees represent our minimum commitment over a five-year Parliament. This manifesto sets out policies to be implemented as economic growth allows. Our ambitions are not limited to these, and are set out in other policy documents. Figures included in both are changes to existing Government revenue and spending plans due to our manifesto commitments. Except for specified items, all Departments will work within current spending plans, unless economic growth allows more. Figures presented are calculated on a UK-wide basis to make comparisons with UK-wide figures from central government and other parties. Different priorities in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland may result in different priorities in practice in the budgetary areas they control.

 Freedom, Justice, Honesty:
 Health
 ----------------------------------         

 Health  is a fundamental  freedom.              Quick Links
 No one  can fulfil their potential       - Cutting Waiting
 without the  best possible health.                Times
 We  will prioritise investment  to
 cut  waiting  times.  But we  also       - Keeping People
 believe   that  it   is  best   to                Healthy
 improve   health   by   preventing       - Caring For
 illness,  tackling  pollution  and                Patients
 reducing poverty.                        - Improving Quality

 Liberal Democrats will:
                                             [Setting You Free]
-  Cut  waiting  times  by
 recruiting   27,500  more  nurses,      Stop government wasting
 4,600  more  doctors,  and  10,250      doctors' and nurses' time
 more   professionals   allied   to      by scrapping meaningless
 medicine.                               bureaucratic targets.
                                         National targets for
- Cut  waiting  times  by     waiting lists serve no
                                         purpose. Doctors, not
 retaining   more   staff   through      government, should decide
 increasing pay  for the worst paid      priorities for treatment,
 NHS  staff by an average  of £1000      using guidelines which
 each per year.                          allow them to assess
                                         patients' needs fairly and
- Cut  waiting  times  by     openly.
 providing   an  additional  10,000
 beds.                                         [Green Action]

- Keep people  healthy by
                                         Healthy Homes
 investing  in  scanning  equipment      We will improve health by
 and abolishing  charges for dental      requiring an energy
 and eye checks.                         efficiency audit to be
                                         completed on all homes
 - End  the   scandal  of     before sale to promote high
 elderly   and  long-term  patients      energy efficiency standards
 having   to   pay  for   long-term      throughout the housing
 personal care costs                     market. Coupled with our
                                         comprehensive strategy to
 The  NHS has suffered  for decades      tackle fuel poverty this
 from     under-investment,    most      will mean that everyone can
 notably during  the eighteen years      have a warm home. This will
 of the Thatcher and Major               tackle the damp and cold
 Governments.  Labour  promised  to      which affect the health of
 save the  NHS. Instead, they spent      millions of people, and
 three  years unnecessarily  locked      reduce winter deaths caused
 into   the  Conservative  spending      by fuel poverty. With less
 plans which  caused the problem in      energy needed to heat
 the first  place. The new NHS plan      homes, CO2 emissions will
 falls  far short  of Tony  Blair's      also be reduced.
 declared  aim  of bringing  health
 spending  in  Britain  up  to  the      Clean Air
 levels of our European                  We will tackle the air
 neighbours.                             pollution responsible for
                                         respiratory problems like
 The  NHS still lacks  the capacity      asthma by introducing
 to  give patients the  first-class      incentives for people to
 treatment  which they deserve.  It      switch to less polluting
 is short of staff, beds,                vehicles, reducing reliance
 hospitals  and residential  homes.      on cars by increasing the
 Liberal  Democrats offer something      use of public transport,
 different   based  on  clear   and      and tackling industrial
 distinct  priorities. Our starting      pollution. We will also
 point   is   that  prevention   is      provide better quality
 better than cure.                       information , increasing
                                         the number of air
 It  is   also  important  to  give      monitoring sites for key
 professionals  greater freedom  to      pollutants in all areas.
 do  their jobs.  Labour has  tried
 to  control  far too  much of  the
 NHS from the centre. The
 Conservatives'  attempt  to  apply
 market     principles     produced
 inefficiency     and     iniquity.
 Liberal  Democrats  will cut  back
 the  role  of  Whitehall and  give
 doctors  and managers the  freedom
 to get  on and run the NHS without
 political interference.

       Cutting Waiting Times
 Lengthy  waiting times are  one of
 the worst  aspects of the NHS. The
 best  way to cut waiting  times is
 to increase the number of
 doctors,  nurses and professionals
 allied  to medicine. They  are the
 greatest  asset  of  the  NHS  and
 increasing  their  numbers is  the
 best   way   of   increasing   the
 capacity  of  the  NHS. Under  the
 Conservatives,  too many left  and
 too few were trained and
 recruited.  Four   years  on,  the
 service is  just as overstretched.
 There   is  also   now  a   severe
 year-round   lack  of  acute   and
 intermediate  care  beds  and  the
 staff  to  support  them.  To  cut
 waiting times, we will:

 Provide training  places for an extra 4,600 doctors and 27,500 nurses and
 midwives over  five years.  This means an extra 2,500 training places for
 doctors  and 7,500 for nurses on top of  the measures that the government
 has  proposed in  the NHS  National Plan.   We would also  provide 10,250
 extra  professionals allied to medicine  such as occupational therapists,
 podiatrists, physiotherapists  and speech therapists. This means an extra
 3,750  training places  on top  of the  measures that the  government has
 proposed.

 Reward  low-paid  nurses, midwives  and other  low-paid  professionals by
 paying  them an  additional £1000  on average  every year.  We  will also
 boost  staff  retention  by making  additional  funds  available for  pay
 increases  for other  NHS staff.  After taking  these immediate  steps to
 help  retain dedicated  staff, we  would set  up a Commission  to examine
 terms  and  working  conditions throughout  the  health  service, and  to
 establish  a single pay review  system to ensure fairness  for all staff.

 Provide  an  extra  10,000 hospital  beds  over five  years.  This  means
 providing 3,000  extra beds on top of the government's current plans.  We
 will  also  review  the  criteria  by  which PFI  contracts  are  judged,
 creating  a level playing  field between different  financial options and
 so  ensure  there  are  enough  new  beds  to meet  local  health  needs.

 Guarantee booked  dates for appointments with consultants and for surgery
 after the GP first refers a patient.

 Give  priority to the most  needy.  We will introduce  a scorecard system
 that  takes account not  just of clinical  need but also of  the needs of
 the  patient.  This would give doctors  objective guidelines to help them
 (but not bind them) in determining priorities.

                          Keeping People Healthy
 To support  good health it is vital to tackle poverty and to have a clean
 environment.  But it is  also important that the  National Health Service
 delivers  high  quality preventive  care. The  NHS should  not just  be a
 National  Sickness Service. We  will invest  more in early  detection and
 prevention, and  in improving the environment. This will not only achieve
 better  levels of health,  but also  save money in the  long run. Liberal
 Democrats will:

 Inject  an extra £500 million  over five years into  dental services. The
 money  will be used to  guarantee access for everyone  to an NHS dentist.
 We  will do so by rewarding dentists for working  in the NHS and offering
 them  incentives to invest  in new equipment and  buildings, to encourage
 practitioners  to  return to  NHS  work. The  British Dental  Association
 estimates  that this would  bring back  the equivalent of  1000 full-time
 dentists to NHS work.

 Double the  Government's commitment to invest more in the latest scanning
 and  diagnostic equipment.  We will  provide extra advanced  equipment in
 hospitals across the country.

 Restore  free NHS  dental check-ups  for all  to promote oral  health and
 prevent disease.

 Provide  free  eye checks  for all  to ensure  that problems  are spotted
 earlier.

 Appoint  a Minister of Public  Health based in the  Cabinet Office rather
 than  the  Department  of Health  to  co-ordinate all  aspects of  public
 health policy across government departments.

 Make  more tests available  in GP surgeries and  pharmacies for diabetes,
 cholesterol,  anaemia,  HIV/AIDS, TB,  prostate and  colorectal diseases.

 Promote  a wider availability  of complementary  medicines and healthcare
 through  the NHS  to take  maximum advantage  of different  approaches to
 health.

                            Caring For Patients
 All  too often,  the NHS fails  to provide  the care that  patients need.
 Except  in Scotland, people in long-term care have  to pay for someone to
 bath or  feed them. Drugs available on the NHS in one part of the country
 are not  available in another - the 'postcode lottery'. Liberal Democrats
 will:

 Pay  for all long-term personal care costs.  The Royal Commission on Long
 Term  Care, set up by Labour, recommended that  these costs should be met
 by  the  state.  The Westminster  Government  ignored  this key  finding,
 though  Liberal Democrats in  Scotland are  using their influence  in the
 Scottish Executive to implement it.

 Tackle  the postcode  lottery which  means that  some medicines  are only
 available  in  some  parts of  the  country.  We will  scrap the  present
 secretive  system for  buying medicines.  In its  place we will  create a
 Pharmaceutical  Agency to use  the purchasing  power of the  NHS to drive
 down  the price of  established drugs  and secure the  more sophisticated
 medicines  and technologies at  affordable prices. The  money saved would
 be  used  to end  the postcode  lottery and  make advanced  and expensive
 drugs  more  available within  the NHS.  Over time,  we will  use further
 savings  to  reduce and  eventually scrap  prescription charges  for all.

 In the long term we will aim to:

 Increase  funding for mental health services. All  people in need of care
 and  support should be assessed individually  to ensure that they receive
 the  treatment they need.  Our proposals for ending  the postcode lottery
 will  ensure that mental health  care offers the best  treatment with the
 fewest  side effects. This  will encourage them to  comply with treatment
 and   diminish   the   risk  to   themselves   and   to  the   community.

 Increase  local  authority social  services budgets.  This  would provide
 more  community   care  places,  improve  preventive  and  rehabilitation
 services,  give further support  and respite to carers,  and provide more
 social   workers  to   support  elderly   people,  those   with  learning
 difficulties and others.

                             Improving Quality
 Patients should  have a right to a high-quality NHS. They should know how
 well  the NHS is performing and who is  responsible when things go wrong.
 They  should  also  have access  to  proper information  about their  own
 cases.  Vulnerable people need someone  to champion them if  they are not
 receiving  adequate treatment. The private  sector should complement, not
 compete  with, the  NHS, which  we are  committed to making  world class,
 comprehensive  and  accessible  to everyone.  Labour  have not  addressed
 these   questions  adequately.  When  they   abolished  Community  Health
 Councils,  they  failed  to  set  up  an  adequate  alternative.  Liberal
 Democrats will:

 Develop  Patient  Care  Guarantees ,  to  provide patients  with  minimum
 standards  of treatment, to  which the  NHS will be  held accountable. We
 will  start by building  on existing National  Service Frameworks (NSFs),
 for  example on cancer, heart disease and  mental health, and ensure that
 future  NSFs  incorporate Patient  Care Guarantees.  We will  develop new
 NSFs  on children in care,  prosthetic limbs, hepatitis C,  HIV and AIDS,
 palliative  care, nutrition,  adoption, neurological  services, diabetes,
 maternity services and dentistry among others.

 Make the  NHS more accountable by increasing local democracy on Trust and
 Primary  Care Trust  boards, giving  the Commons Health  Select Committee
 more  resources  and increasing  the powers  of  the Health  Ombudsman to
 examine  policies  and initiate  inquiries. We  will also  transfer local
 responsibility  for  public  health  from  health  authorities  to  local
 councils.

 Give  patients access to  independent advocates.  Children, frail elderly
 people  and those with learning  difficulties would particularly benefit.
 There  would be a  Children's Rights Commissioner  to represent children.

 Introduce no-fault  compensation. At the moment, compensation for medical
 negligence  is a lottery. While  some are awarded excessive multi-million
 pound  payouts, the  length and  cost of  the process  of going  to court
 leaves  others with nothing. Our  system would be far  simpler, with fair
 compensation  for patients and  their families, and an  end to burdensome
 legal costs.

 Promote  better access to  services. If  local NHS services  do not offer
 patients  the treatment they need,  we will enable the  patient to use an
 alternative  facility. Choice will extend into  use of the private sector
 - but at NHS cost price.

 End  the use of mixed wards so that patients  have more dignity when they
 are in hospital.

 Legislate  against discrimination  on the  grounds of  age in  health and
 social care.  Clinical need, not preconceived judgments about age, should
 be   the  criterion  for  deciding   who  receives  treatment  and  when.


 Freedom, Justice, Honesty:
 Education and Employment
 ---------------------------------       

                                                 Quick Links
                                         - Class Sizes and
                                                  Teachers
                                         - Books and
 High quality education is the key                Equipment
 to  personal freedom.  We believe
 that    every    child   matters.       - Widening Choice,
 Education provides the freedom to                Cutting
 choose   a  fulfilling  job,  the                Bureaucracy
 freedom  to exploit one's talents       - Early Years
 to  the full, and  the freedom to                Education
 contribute   fully   to  society.
 Education  is  also  the  key  to      - Higher Education
 Britain's future prosperity.            - Further Education
                                                  and Lifelong
                                                  Learning
                                         - Employment and
                                                  Training

 Liberal Democrats will:
                                             [Setting You Free]
 -    Cut   class  sizes   on
 average to 25 for 5-11 year-olds.       Abolish the excessive
                                         benefit sanctions brought
 -    Recruit   5000   extra     in under the New Deal.
                                         These have done little to
 secondary   school   teachers  to       encourage people back to
 reduce   class  sizes  for  11-16       work and have made the
 year-olds                               families of those penalised
                                         suffer. We will not impose
 -    Increase  funding   for     further sanctions until the
 books and equipment in schools          effects of existing
                                         penalties have been
 -     Cut   bureaucracy   in     evaluated.
 schools and interfere less in the       Stop government wasting
 professional     judgements    of       teachers' time by scrapping
 teachers                                directives and targets in
                                         education which undermine
 -       Abolish    university    the professional judgement
 tuition fees                            and expertise of teachers.
                                         We will also return the
 Britain  has  been  held  back by       main responsibilities for
 under-investment   in  education.       standards to universities
 Children   from  poorer  families       themselves.
 have been particularly
 ill-served.   The   Conservatives             [Green Action]
 failed   to   fund   schools  and
 colleges  adequately. Labour have
 done far too little to put things       Learning for a Green Future
 right.   In  schools,  they  have       We will increase
 invested in paperwork rather than       environmental awareness
 people, demoralising teachers and       amongst young people, by
 wasting  resources by  creating a       encouraging local
 mountain of extra bureaucracy. In       environmental projects and
 the Higher Education sector, they       by teaching sustainability
 have   made   matters   worse  by       in schools. Children's
 introducing   university  tuition       influence on their parents'
 fees.                                   involvement in 'green'
                                         activities will relate
 We  are clear about our goals and       directly to the aims of our
 determined  to  reach  them.  Our       National Recycling
 plans will cost around £3 billion       Programme.
 extra  each year. We guarantee to
 introduce   the   extra   funding       Healthy and Safe Journeys
 needed  at  the beginning  of the       to School
 next  Parliament, irrespective of       We will promote the
 short-term  economic  growth.  We       development of Safe Routes
 will  put an  extra penny  on the       to School, to encourage
 basic  rate of income tax to meet       parents to allow their
 this  commitment.  Growth  in the       children to walk or cycle
 future  may allow  us to  be more       to school in safety rather
 ambitious still.                        than driving them. Children
                                         will gain benefits for
 We  believe that  most day-to-day       their physical health from
 decision-making  in  education is       the increased exercise. At
 best  done  by  teachers, schools       the same time, this will
 and  local  authorities,  not  by       assist in reducing
 central government.                     congestion and pollution
                                         during peak times of the
                                         day by reducing car use.
  Every Child Matters: Class Sizes
           and Teachers                  Greener School Buildings
 Under  the  Conservatives,  class       We will fund a 'Schools
 sizes were far too high. Even the       2010' programme to tackle
 most  dedicated  teachers  cannot       the backlog of school
 give  the attention  which pupils       building repairs. The
 need  when  there  are  more than       programme would include
 thirty to a class. Labour pledged       environmental assessment of
 to do better, but their reduction       buildings.
 of  class sizes for 5-7 year-olds
 came   at  the  price  of  larger
 classes  for 8-11  year-olds. The
 parents  whose children were five
 in   1997  now   see  their  nine
 year-olds suffering the
 consequences  of this  sleight of
 hand.   In   secondary   schools,
 classes are larger than they have
 been for twenty years.

 To  make  a  real  difference  to
 class sizes and improve standards
 achieved  by  all  children, more
 teachers  are needed  in schools.
 The   Conservatives  under-valued
 and  demoralised  the profession.
 Many  of Labour's efforts to make
 amends have misfired.
 Performance-related   pay   is  a
 crude   and  unfair  approach  to
 rewarding  teachers. Teachers are
 also  burdened with more and more
 unnecessary   bureaucracy.  Small
 wonder  that there is now a grave
 shortage   of  teachers.  Liberal
 Democrats   will  spend  over  £1
 billion   extra  each   year  to:

 Cut  class sizes on average to 25
 for  all 5-11  year-olds. We will
 do this by establishing a maximum
 average  class size of 25 in each
 local     authority's     primary
 schools.

 Fund   5000  additional  secondary   teacher  places.   This  will  bring
 pupil:teacher  ratios back to around 1997 levels  and start to improve on
 them. We  will put particular emphasis on recruiting teachers in shortage
 subjects.

 Guarantee  a  classroom assistant  for every  25  pupils in  the  5-7 age
 bracket  (Key Stage  1) to  improve the  ratio of  adults to  children in
 infant  school   classrooms.  We  will  provide  40,000  extra  classroom
 assistants,   including  25,000  for  5-7   year-olds,  compared  to  the
 government's   plan   to   spread   20,000   across   all   age   groups.

 Introduce  paid preparation hours for  primary teachers. By funding extra
 posts,  we will be  able to allow  all primary teachers two  paid hours a
 week to prepare and plan lessons.

 Pay  trainee  teachers  a  full  training  salary replacing  the  current
 training grants to improve teacher recruitment.

 Improve  Information  and  Communications  Technology  (ICT) support  for
 teachers. At  the moment, teachers have to spend too much time out of the
 classroom maintaining  computer equipment and so have less time to devote
 to  their pupils. Drawing  on the experience of  the recently established
 e-learning  foundations, we will establish  educational charitable trusts
 to  arrange the lease  of computer  equipment and services.  We will also
 invest  in  training  related  to  the  use  of  new  science  equipment.

 Scrap  Performance Related Pay.  Instead we will link  teachers' pay with
 professional  development to boost morale  in the teaching profession and
 improve  retention  of  experienced  teachers.  Teachers  will  have  the
 opportunity  to take a  series of in-service training  courses. Each time
 they   pass,    they   will   gain   a   significant   salary   increase.

 In the long term, our goal is:

 A  maximum average  class size  of 18  for all  secondary classes  with a
 practical element such as science and modern languages

                 Every Child Matters : Books and Equipment
 There  are still too  many schools  having to make do  with dog-eared and
 out-dated  text books  shared between  several pupils. Schools  also lack
 the computer  equipment needed to prepare children for the digital age in
 which  they   live  and  will  have  to  work.  Liberal  Democrats  will:

 Increase  funding  for  books and  equipment  in schools  over and  above
 existing  spending  levels.  We would  provide  an average  of £1250  per
 primary  school and £4250  per secondary  school per year.  Schools could
 choose  to  spend  this  money  on  books  or Information  Communications
 Technology (ICT) software such as CD-ROMs.

 Increase  funding   for  ICT  and  science  equipment  and  purchase  and
 maintenance,  and  ICT training  for  teachers within  schools, over  and
 above existing spending levels.

                   Widening Choice, Cutting Bureaucracy
 Under  the  Conservatives  and Labour,  schools  have  been deluged  with
 bureaucracy absorbing  far too much of teachers' time to the detriment of
 their pupils.  Whitehall has enclosed the school system in a straitjacket
 which  stifles   professional  creativity  and  confines  teachers  to  a
 curriculum  which is too narrow and  cannot adapt to local circumstances.
 We will:

 Replace  the  National Curriculum  with a  less rigid  Minimum Curriculum
 Entitlement.  We  will  provide  for  a  broad  and  balanced  curriculum
 including   languages,   science,   maths,   the   humanities,   physical
 development (including  sports instruction and advice on healthy eating),
 religious  education, parenting, citizenship  and creative  arts. We will
 increase  funding for free musical tuition  to encourage more children to
 learn an instrument.

 Replace  all  national school  targets with  a statutory  requirement for
 schools  to  develop individual  education plans  for pupils,  with clear
 individual  targets  and criteria  for  improvement. The  quality of  the
 plans   would  be  guaranteed  through   national  value-added  criteria.

 Maintain  the  key  role  of  Local  Education Authorities  in  providing
 education and  guaranteeing standards and in co-ordinating vital services
 such as the provision of Special Educational Needs.

 Annually review  all Whitehall directives. This would result in an annual
 cull  of  all  irrelevant instructions  to  LEAs,  schools and  governing
 bodies.

 Issue  annual  reports  to  all  parents  on  their  children's  school's
 performance. Unlike  the current crude league tables, these reports would
 measure  the value added  each year  by a school, using  the test results
 from  a child's start at the school as the  baseline. This will result in
 league  tables that genuinely  show how  schools are performing.  We will
 also  promote school councils to  give pupils a greater  say in how their
 school is run.

 Reduce  testing of the  youngest school  children. We will  scrap testing
 ('SATs') at age 7, while keeping it for older pupils.

 Reform  the school  inspection system.  Tough, independent  inspection is
 essential,  but the current approach  of Ofsted often intimidates schools
 instead  of helping them. We  will require inspectors to  offer advice on
 improvement, not  merely criticism, and require Ofsted to take account of
 a  school's self-evaluation.  We will  also establish  Departments within
 Ofsted  for each of  the various  areas which it inspects  (such as Early
 Years  and  Schools),  and  ensure  each is  headed  up  by someone  with
 technical expertise in the subject.

 In the long term, our goal is to:

 Reduce  the disparity  in per-pupil  funding through a  minimum education
 funding entitlement based on the current median level.

 Promote   co-operation  between  state  and   private  schools.  We  will
 encourage  independent  schools  to  share  their  facilities with  state
 schools  to  spread  opportunity for  all.  We  will require  independent
 schools  to  offer the  Minimum  Curriculum Entitlement.  We will  extend
 charitable  status  to  all schools  and  maintain the  VAT exemption  on
 school fees.

                           Early Years Education
 Under  both  Labour  and  Conservative  governments  the inequalities  in
 British  society have been  increased by  the lack of  proper early years
 education.  Better-off  children, with  greater stimulus  from  the home,
 pre-school  playgroups or from  nursery schools, have had  a flying start
 at  primary school over  those who  have not had  these advantages. Often
 children  deprived in these  early years  never catch up.  Too much early
 years provision  is still not of a sufficient standard. We will guarantee
 quality   nursery  education,   which  makes   a  real   contribution  to
 intellectual,  emotional  and  social development  at this  all-important
 stage in life. We will:

 Fund  1000 early years  specialists to work with  early years development
 partnerships  to  ensure that  children  receive proper  stimulus in  the
 early  years either at nursery school,  pre-school playgroups or at home.

 Establish a  budget to give additional training to nursery teachers. This
 would  fund  courses  and  extra  supply  teachers  to  cover  for  those
 undertaking training.

 Increase  funding for outdoor  facilities for  nurseries. Ultimately, all
 nurseries  should  have  a  place  for children  to  play  out of  doors.

 Strengthen  links  between home  and school  recognising  that children's
 early  development depends critically on  the relationship between school
 and family.

 Ensure  that  the  early  years  curriculum  has sufficient  quality  and
 breadth to  facilitate intellectual, emotional and social development and
 ensure  that  play is  recognised as  a  key component  of  this process.
                             Higher Education
 Britain's  universities  have  traditionally  had  a  high  international
 reputation.  During   the  eighteen  years  of  Conservative  rule,  that
 reputation  was  threatened  by an  ever  tighter  squeeze on  resources.
 Labour  has  attempted  to address  the  problem of  underfunding by  the
 counter-productive  method of introducing tuition  fees, which deter many
 students  from  going  to  university.  Tuition  fees also  impose  great
 hardship  on many who  take up  university places, and  their parents. We
 are  also opposed to the levying of  top-up fees. Liberal Democrats will:

 Abolish  university tuition fees  throughout the  United Kingdom. Liberal
 Democrats have  already achieved this in Scotland by making it a priority
 issue and have set abolition in train in Wales.

 Reform  student maintenance.  We would  restore grants for  poor students
 and access  to benefits for all during the summer holidays, and raise the
 salary  threshold  at  which  student  loans  are repaid,  in  the  first
 instance from £10,000 to £13,000 per year.

 Improve  access for  under-represented groups  by tripling  the incentive
 payments  for recruitment and retention  of under-represented, mature and
 part-time  students.  We would  pay colleges  one-third on  admission and
 two-thirds on completion of a course.

 Improve  salaries  to attract  and retain  high-quality staff.  Our first
 steps  will be to end the unacceptable gap between  pay for men and women
 at  universities and to  tackle similar inequalities faced  by casual and
 part-time staff.

 Ensure   that  universities  are  properly   resourced  by  opposing  any
 reduction  in  the  'unit of  resource'  -  the money  that a  university
 receives per  student. In the long term, our goal is to increase the unit
 of resource.
                  Further Education and Lifelong Learning
 Few  jobs these  days are  for life. To  succeed as  a nation, we  need a
 flexible workforce  which is used to acquiring new skills. Access to good
 quality further  education is equally important to individuals as a means
 of  fulfilling their aspirations. For  too long, this sector  has been at
 the  bottom  of  the  educational  pile.  Liberal Democrats  see  further
 education as an important priority. We will:

 Give  every  adult an  entitlement to  publicly  funded tuition.  We will
 provide  the funding to allow  any adult the chance  to acquire a Level 2
 qualification  (the   equivalent  of  5  GCSEs  at  grades  A  to  C,  an
 intermediate  GNVQ or a  Foundation Modern Apprenticeship).  We will fund
 those aged  16 to 24 up to Level 3 (equivalent  to 2 A-Levels at grades A
 to  E, an  Advanced GNVQ  or an  Advanced Modern Apprenticeship).  In the
 long  term,  our goal  is to  extend  this further  entitlement  to every
 adult. All  those on these courses would be entitled to a student loan to
 cover maintenance, depending on their income.

 Simplify  the  funding  and  qualification  systems.  We will  merge  the
 Learning and  Skills Council and the Higher Education Funding Council for
 England  into a single Learning Council for  England. We will also reform
 the  National  Vocational  Qualification system  to  cut bureaucracy  and
 allow students  to accumulate credits from different courses and transfer
 them.

 In the long term, our goal is to:

 Give  every  citizen  an  Individual  Learning  Account. Ultimately  this
 approach  to life-long learning  would provide the  flexibility to access
 each   person's  entitlement  to  post-sixteen   education  throughout  a
 person's  life, rather than at times imposed  by the state. Tuition would
 be  paid for and student  loans would be available  for maintenance. This
 would  help,   for  example,  women  with  children  who  have  to  study
 part-time.
                          Employment and Training
 Britain is  still held back by a lack of skills in the workforce. Without
 placing  unnecessary burdens on  individual firms,  Liberal Democrats are
 committed  to training programmes which  would bring enormous benefits to
 the economy as a whole.

 The  recent  relative health  of the  economy  has concealed  hotspots of
 unemployment  and  deprivation in  many  parts of  the country.  Labour's
 efforts  to combat unemployment have not  always been directed where they
 are most needed. We will:

 Introduce  tax  incentives  for  small  and  medium-sized enterprises  to
 improve  training. Companies  eligible would  include those  working with
 Investors in  People, those introducing a company training plan under the
 Skills for  Small Businesses programme, and those training an employee to
 master  training level. We will also  require all registered companies to
 report  on staff  training and  development in  their Annual  Reports and
 Accounts.

 Empower  National  Training Organisations  to conduct  ballots  of member
 employers. This  will enable them to introduce a training levy if support
 is demonstrated.

 Entitle  every 16-24 year-old to study leave  with pay. Employers will be
 obliged  to release their staff  for courses which are  relevant to their
 work.  The   scheme  will  be  implemented  in  consultation  with  small
 businesses.

 Replace  the  New  Deal  with  a  Flexible  Guarantee  of  help  for  all
 jobseekers,  administered through  a combined  Benefits and  Jobs Agency.
 This  will be a world-class job search and  placement service. It will be
 equally  open to those  not on  the unemployment register  who would like
 work.

 Tackle  unemployment hotspots by transferring  budgets to the nations and
 regions   of  the  UK.  A   proportion  of  the  Government's  Employment
 Opportunities  Fund  should be  administered by  the nations  and regions
 which  are best  placed to  spend the  money effectively  alongside their
 economic regeneration budgets.

 Freedom, Justice, Honesty:
 Law and Order
 ----------------------------------         
 We  all want  freedom from  crime.
 Fear  of crime  blights the  lives
 of  many people, particularly  the              Quick Links
 most  vulnerable  in society.  The       - Police
 state   should   offer   all   its
 citizens    equal   and   adequate       - Prisons
 protection.    Our   approach   is       - The Criminal
 rooted  in  the  belief  that  the                Justice System
 best  way  to  beat crime  in  the       - Tackling the
 medium  and long  term is to  have                Cause of Crime
 effective  policies to tackle  its
 causes.

 Liberal Democrats will:
                                             [Setting You Free]
-     Recruit   6000   extra
 police officers                         Liberalise licensing laws.
                                         We will replace mandatory
-     Fund   2000   part-time    closing times for pubs with
                                         locally determined opening
 community officers                      times.

-      Reinforce   front-line    Make non-payment of TV
 police   with  a  new    Community      Licences a civil matter
 Safety  Force   and  by  retaining      rather than a criminal
 retired  officers   in  a  back-up      offence.
 role
                                         Abandon plans to introduce
-      Cut   reoffending   by    a Public Defender Scheme
                                         which would limit the
 preparing   prisoners   adequately      independence of defence
 for  a law-abiding  life on  their      advocates.
 release

-    Give   victims  greater           [Green Action]
 rights to be heard in court
                                         Preventing Pollution
 During  their  eighteen  years  in      We will improve enforcement
 office,  the Conservatives pursued      of pollution controls
 a   policy  on  crime   which  was      through an expanded
 superficially  populist yet highly      inspectorate for the
 ineffective.   They   filled   the      Environment Agency, to
 prisons to  overflowing, at a huge      support full implementation
 cost   to   the  taxpayer.   Crime      of the statutory pollution
 doubled,  violent crime rose  year      control regime. This will
 after  year,  and  the  number  of      be reinforced by increasing
 convictions    fell.    Meanwhile,      the level of penalties
 contrary   to  repeated  promises,      which polluters have to pay
 police  numbers  fell  during  the      and the introduction of
 last    Conservative   government.      legislation on corporate
                                         environmental liability. We
 Labour  has been  trying to  sound      will also use these same
 as  tough,  or  tougher, than  the      powers to ensure that
 Conservatives,  but   is  no  more      biotech companies are
 effective.   Police  numbers  have      liable for any harm caused
 fallen further  over the past four      by GM crops and food.
 years.  Labour too often  proposes
 simplistic   solutions.  Many  are
 impractical  or  irrelevant.  Some
 actually undermine civil
 liberties.
               Police
 Our   priority   is  to   increase
 police  numbers to prevent  crime,
 to  catch criminals when  offences
 do  take  place,  and to  increase
 the    current   deplorably    low
 clear-up  rate.  To make  policing
 across the country more
 effective, we will:

 Fund  the  police  for  6000  more
 police  officers  than March  2000
 levels. We will fund 2000
 recruits on top of the
 government's   plans   to   ensure
 there  is real increase  in police
 strength, not  just replacing cuts
 under Labour and the
 Conservatives.    We   will   also
 ensure that  the police spend more
 time  on  front-line policing  and
 provide  extra resources to  boost
 retention   of  police   officers.

 Fund  2000 part-time  community officers  by creating  a new  category of
 part  time  retained police  officers. This  would  give the  police more
 flexibility.  Suitable  members of  the public  and police  officers near
 retirement  wishing to continue  in work will be  recruited, given proper
 training  and equipped for the  duties of a police  constable. The scheme
 will  build on the  current role  of unpaid special  constables, and free
 existing  police  to  use  their  time  and resources  more  effectively.
 Retained officers  will supplement the work of regular police and provide
 a  more adequate presence  in areas  where resources have  not permitted.
 This  scheme will help  to meet  our aim of  creating a network  of named
 local police officers for every community.

 Establish   a  Community  Safety  Force  to   work  with  the  police  by
 co-ordinating  the  public safety  work  of traffic  wardens, estate  and
 neighbourhood  wardens, park  superintendents and other  public officials
 who  deal with  nuisance crimes  like littering, vandalism  and graffiti.
 They  will  receive  special  training.  This  will free  the  police  to
 concentrate on more serious offences.

 Make  local Crime  and Disorder  Partnerships focus on  real improvements
 for   local  residents.  We  will   give  local  crime  partnerships  the
 responsibility  for managing  and directing  Community Safety  Forces. We
 will  also  fund  the involvement  of  local police  forces in  community
 activities  designed  to involve  ethnic minorities  and  increase public
 confidence in all sections of society.

 Make  the police more  accountable. Public  confidence in the  police has
 declined. As  well as seeking to improve the visibility of the police and
 improving  police   relations  with  the  community,  we  will  create  a
 genuinely  independent police complaints  system to  deal with complaints
 speedily,  efficiently and impartially.  We will  encourage police forces
 to be  more representative of the communities they serve, and ensure that
 'stop  and search' is based on intelligence  and attaches no relevance to
 the race or colour of those stopped by the police.

 Commission  an  independent report  on the  police resources  the country
 needs  in  the long  term. We  will  establish a  Standing  Conference on
 Policing  comprising representatives of all  police ranks, the public and
 experts in  policing issues. This will regularly report to government and
 parliament,  advising on the  resources required to  provide an effective
 police  presence  in  every  community,  and  the  management  of  police
 stations  and technology. It will also review the  use of police time, in
 particular   that    devoted   to   paperwork   and   court   procedures.

 Support the  work of Europol, the EU police agency, and the establishment
 of a  European police college, subject to proper democratic oversight. We
 wish  to see police forces  working together in the  fight against crime,
 particularly  international crimes  such as drug  trafficking, terrorism,
 customs  fraud, money laundering and the trade  in human beings for slave
 labour or sexual exploitation.

                                  Prisons
 The  last  Conservative  Home  Secretary  Michael  Howard  famously  said
 "prison works".  But half of the people who have served time in Britain's
 jails  go on to reoffend on release. Many  prisons are colleges of crime.
 People  incarcerated for  minor offences  learn how  to commit  much more
 serious ones.

 Liberal   Democrats  reject  the  knee-jerk   Conservative  approach  and
 Labour's  attempts to echo  it. We will  not be any less  tough on crime,
 but we will be more effective. We will:

 Focus resources  on crime prevention rather than prison building. Prisons
 are  very expensive. There are many  more cost-effective ways of reducing
 crime  than ever-longer sentences. We believe  that people should be sent
 to prison  if the public need to be protected from them or if this is the
 only  way to punish them effectively. But  to release resources for crime
 prevention  and to cut  reoffending, we  believe there is  more scope for
 the  use  of  community  sentences  which are  proven  to  work, such  as
 electronic  tagging, reparation  to victims,  fines, drug  treatment, and
 probation orders.

 Cut  reoffending by ex-prisoners. Previous  governments have concentrated
 a  great deal on sending people to prison, but  not nearly enough on what
 goes  on once they are  there. We believe that  prisoners should put in a
 full working  day in jail. They should also have access to skill training
 and  courses in  literacy to equip  them for  work after release,  and be
 given  more  support and  rehabilitation once  they have  completed their
 sentences.  We will also use  weekend and evening custody  to permit some
 offenders   during  sentence  to  enter   paid  work  prior  to  release.

 Make  prisons more effective.  We will  make minimum levels  of education
 and  work, and rehabilitation programmes,  central to prison regimes, and
 set  standards  expected  through Service  Delivery  Agreements. We  will
 increase   the  amount  of  commercial   activity  undertaken  by  prison
 industries.  We will also boost the powers  of the prison inspectorate so
 that it can force change, not just report on failure.

 In the long term, our goal is to:

 Improve  the successful resettlement of  released prisoners. There should
 be  more  use of  pre-release assessments  of  the resettlement  needs of
 prisoners, in  particular for the majority who have served sentences, and
 for  whom  current  arrangements are  totally  inadequate.  The focus  of
 resettlement  should   be  on  housing  needs,  employment  and  training
 schemes, and preventing substance misuse.

                        The Criminal Justice System
 Conservative  and Labour Governments in turn  have attempted to erode the
 criminal justice  system. Labour have been intent on curtailing the right
 to  the  fundamental freedom  of jury  trial,  as first  proposed  by the
 Conservatives.   The  Conservatives   increased  the  use   of  mandatory
 sentences,  taking  away  judicial  discretion  to  make decisions  based
 appropriately on  the facts of an individual case. Liberal Democrats wish
 to  enhance  the powers  of the  courts. We  also want  to see  a greater
 recognition   of   the   rights   of   victims   of   crime.   We   will:

 Give victims,  or their families, greater rights to be heard in court. We
 will give  victims the right to be kept fully informed about the progress
 of  the  cases  with  which  they  are  involved. We  will  also  provide
 opportunities for  them to make statements in court about the effect that
 the  crime has had on  them after the jury  has delivered its verdict and
 before  the judge passes sentence. We  will offer victims greater support
 during  the progress  of a  case. Criminal  injury compensation  is often
 inadequate  or unavailable and  so we  will improve the  scheme to ensure
 that  the  most  serious cases  receive  adequate  compensation. We  will
 strengthen  support  for victims  of domestic  violence by  offering more
 training in this area to the relevant professionals.

 Tackle  hate crimes.  We will  establish police hate  crime investigation
 units  to coordinate  information and  action against  racist, homophobic
 and  other hate  crimes. We  will also  legislate against hate  crimes by
 widening  current  legislation to  include all  hate  crimes on  the same
 basis as that existing for racially motivated crime.

 End  mandatory  sentencing  except  for  minor  offences (such  as  fixed
 penalty  motoring  offences),  so that  judges  and  not politicians  set
 sentences.

 Retain  jury trials for  middle-ranking cases  threatened by the  Mode of
 Trial Bill and restore the right to silence.

 Ensure  that fostering  and adoption  law and  practice are based  on the
 suitability  of   individual  fosterers  and  the  needs  of  the  child.

 In the long term, we will also:

 Propose  a new way of sentencing for the  most serious offenders. We will
 consult on  introducing indefinite sentences for the most serious sex and
 violent  offenders,  so that  they would  only  be released  following an
 assessment  by  the  court  of  the  risk  which they  pose  to  society.

 Create  a Department of Justice. This will  ensure a separation of powers
 between the  legal system and law enforcement agencies, reform the powers
 of  the Lord Chancellor, and  help to provide a  fairer system of justice
 for  all. We will establish  a review of the  legal aid system, to ensure
 genuine access to justice

 Overhaul  the youth justice  system. We  will expand reform  of the youth
 justice  system  to  ensure  a  greater  focus  on  the  root  causes  of
 misbehaviour,  and  on education  and rehabilitation.  We want  a greater
 role  for the principles  of restorative justice,  with offenders meeting
 their  victims,   discovering  the  consequences  of  their  actions  and
 planning  to improve their behaviour in  the future. Reform would respond
 not  only  to the  problems caused  by  child offenders  but also  to the
 problems  they face. We  also favour  smaller youth custody  units rather
 than large  Young Offender Institutions and would ensure that those young
 people who must be held are sent to specialised units.

                       Tackling the Causes of Crime
 We  recognise that many of the most  effective measures against crime are
 not  the responsibility of the  police, the prison system  or the courts.
 Our  policies in many other  areas will have a  significant impact on the
 causes of crime. We will:

 Invest   in  education   to  offer   young  people   more  opportunities.

 Encourage  young people into constructive  activity by increasing support
 for sport, recreation and the youth service.

 Encourage  the use of  Acceptable Behaviour Contracts  (ABCs). These will
 help  reduce  anti-social  behaviour  in  communities  by  young  people,
 without  resorting to  blanket curfews  or immediate use  of heavy-handed
 court action through Anti-Social Behaviour Orders.

 Expand  facilities to help  drug and alcohol abusers.  We will prioritise
 funds  to aim  for a maximum  four-week waiting  time after an  abuser is
 referred for treatment.

 Replace  the  New  Deal  with  a  Flexible  Guarantee  of  help  for  all
 jobseekers,  administered through  a combined  Benefits and  Jobs Agency.

 Help ensure  that people leaving care do not drift into crime by offering
 them support with housing, education and training.

 Establish a  National Crime Reduction Agency to oversee and advise on the
 work  of  local Crime  Reduction Partnerships  and other  crime reduction
 work  undertaken  by  central government.  This  will  ensure that  those
 partnerships  are  effective at  finding local  solutions to  local crime
 problems.

 Establish  a Standing Royal  Commission to  tackle the range  of problems
 currently  associated with drugs. The  approach of successive governments
 has  demonstrably  failed. An  independent Royal  Commission will  take a
 fresh  look at the issue of illegal drugs and  ways to tackle problems in
 such  areas  as  health and  the  huge  profits of  organised crime.  The
 Commission  will also be charged  with recommending strategies to address
 misuse  of  legal drugs  such as  alcohol  and tobacco,  and  other legal
 substances such as solvents.

 Freedom, Justice, Honesty:
 Transport
 --------------------------------            

                                                 Quick Links
                                        - Reducing
 A  decent  transport  system  is                Congestion and
 fundamental  to an equitable and                Pollution
 environmentally      sustainable       - Improving Public
 society.  We will  work to build                Transport
 an  integrated  transport system
 throughout  the country  that is       - Improving
 safe,  reliable  and affordable.                Regulation and
 Our   policies   place   special                Performance
 emphasis  on  reducing  problems       - Railways and
 from pollution and congestion.                  London Underground
                                        - Roads
                                       - Aviation

 Liberal Democrats will:
                                             [Setting You Free]
 -   Provide free  off-peak
 local   travel   on   buses  for       Cut restrictions on local
 pensioners  and disabled people,       government which prevent
 and aim for half-price travel at       councils from raising funds
 all  times for under-19s in full       to improve public transport
 time education                         and the environment.

-    Abolish  car tax  for             [Green Action]
 drivers     of    less-polluting
 vehicles                               Planning for Public
                                        Transport
-      Establish    stronger    Our policies are designed to
 public control over the railways       reduce the need to travel
                                        through better use of the
 While  progress in  other public       planning system, and
 services  in  Britain  has  been       investment in improving
 disappointingly  slow  over  the       public transport so that
 past  four  years,  in transport       people are no longer forced
 the  country  has  clearly  gone       to use their car
 backwards.    Roads   are   more       unnecessarily. We will
 congested.    Buses   are   less       introduce Regional Transport
 reliable. Railways are in chaos.       Plans and strengthen Local
                                        Transport Plans to set
 Privatisation of the railways by       effective strategies for
 the  Conservatives  has  been  a       reducing congestion,
 disaster. Regulation is too lax.       pollution and traffic
 Companies  do not have the right       growth.
 incentives     for     long-term
 investment.    The   system   is       Less Road Building
 fragmented.  It is all too easy,       We will reverse plans for
 when  things  go wrong,  for one       new road building in
 firm   to   pass  the   buck  to       environmentally sensitive
 another. Safety can be                 areas.
 compromised.
                                        Cleaner and More Efficient
 Labour  has  failed  to  win the       Vehicles
 case for increased investment in       We will promote technologies
 public transport. When the price       which improve vehicle
 of  petrol went  up and revenues       efficiency and the use of
 from   petrol  tax  consequently       alternative fuel systems
 soared,  the  Labour  Government       such as Liquified Petroleum
 should  have earmarked the extra       Gas and, in the longer term,
 revenue     specifically     for       biofuels and zero emission
 improving  public  transport. It       vehicles. In addition, we
 failed to do so.                       will improve testing of
                                        vehicle emissions and
      Reducing Congestion and           strictly enforce freight
            Pollution                   vehicle weight limits and
 Many  people rely  on their car.       other safety standards by
 But it is in everyone's                increasing resources devoted
 interests to reduce pollution to       to roadside testing as well
 protect  the environment  and to       as strengthening the MOT
 provide  a viable alternative to       test. We will oppose further
 the  car  wherever  possible. We       increases in weight limits
 will:                                  for freight vehicles.

 Reward   motorists   who   drive
 less-polluting    vehicles    by
 reducing car tax (Vehicle Excise
 Duty)  on  more  environmentally
 friendly  cars and motorcycles -
 abolishing it altogether for the
 greenest  vehicles. We will fund
 this by increasing the amount of
 VED charged on the most
 polluting vehicles.

 Guarantee  not  to  increase the
 tax  per litre of  fuel taken by
 the  government, in  real terms,
 in  the next  Parliament. Should
 the   government  receive  extra
 revenue from VAT due to
 increases  in  fuel  prices,  we
 will  use it to  ease burdens on
 the   travelling   public.   Our
 policies  for  improving  public
 transport  and  encouraging less
 polluting vehicles means that we
 do  not need  to increase petrol
 taxes  further in  order to meet
 our   environmental  objectives.

 Introduce environmental
 incentives for bus operators. We
 will  reform  fuel  duty rebates
 for  bus operators so that these
 are  tied more  closely to those
 running more efficient vehicles,
 particularly     those     using
 alternative fuels.

 Reduce  road traffic. As part of our  policies for reducing pollution and
 congestion  we  will  introduce  legislation  to  ensure that  there  are
 stronger  targets for local  authorities to reduce road  traffic. We will
 also  enable local  authorities to  raise bonds and  establish congestion
 charging  and  private non-residential  parking taxes  to promote  use of
 public transport.

 Reduce  freight  on  the  roads through  increased  use  of railways  and
 waterways.  We will explore partnership  options for developing Britain's
 waterways  (which are vastly under-utilised at  present). We also plan to
 double  the  amount of  freight carried  on  Britain's railways  by 2010.

                        Improving Public Transport
 Britain's public  transport system could be the envy of the world. At the
 moment,  however, it  is expensive,  out of  date and decaying.  We will:

 Extend free  off-peak local travel on buses to pensioners and people with
 disabilities.  This  would extend  across  the UK,  the scheme  currently
 operating  in London and those  being developed in Wales.  In addition we
 will  aim to introduce a scheme of half-fares at  all times for under 19s
 in full-time education.

 Increase   investment  in   public  transport.   We  will   enable  local
 authorities to  raise bonds and establish congestion charging and private
 non-residential   parking   taxes  (including   out-of-town  retail   and
 workplace  parking)  to fund  improved public  transport.  Priorities for
 investment  include:  re-opening  disused  railway  lines  and  stations;
 developing  bus  routes,  cycle paths,  trams,  light  rail systems,  and
 walkways;  better information  for passengers  through a  National Public
 Transport  Information  System;  Local  Authority  sponsored  car-pooling
 schemes;  and  improving  the  ease with  which  passengers  are able  to
 transfer between different modes of transport.

 Create   a  Rural  Transport  Regeneration   Fund  to  improve  community
 transport schemes and public transport in rural areas.

 Support  community  transport,  particularly  in  rural areas,  including
 dial-a-ride,  taxi  buses,  post  buses  and  school buses,  by  widening
 eligibility  for the  existing fuel  duty rebate  tied into  the emission
 standards  of  the  vehicle. This  will  be  funded in  part by  reducing
 eligibility   for   fuel   duty  rebate   for   commercial  tour   buses.

              Improving Transport Regulation and Performance
 Much  of the public  transport system  is run by  private companies. This
 provides  valuable competition, investment and  innovation in the sector.
 But  if it is to  deliver everything that passengers  deserve, it must be
 properly regulated. We will:

 Reform  the regulatory system  for public transport. We  will establish a
 Sustainable Transport  Authority (STA) which will take over the functions
 of the  Strategic Rail Authority and the existing Rail Regulator and also
 have  responsibility  for oversight  of bus  and coach  operators, trams,
 ferries,  coastal shipping and  inland waterways.  The STA will  work to:
 upgrade  safety,  access and  quality; enhance  the rail  network; tackle
 monopolies,  particularly taking  immediate and effective  action against
 predatory  behaviour in the  bus industry;  develop through-ticketing and
 timetable  integration; improve the  safety and  quality of rail  and bus
 stations by  introducing a Safer Stations Charter Mark scheme; and ensure
 refunds  for failure to  fulfil adequate standards  of service, including
 punctuality.

                    Railways and the London Underground
 Britain's railways  are in chaos. They are a major casualty of many years
 of  neglect and underinvestment  by successive governments.  We will work
 to  see Railtrack become  a not-for-profit, public  interest company, and
 develop the  railway system as the backbone of a modern transport system.
 In addition, we will:

 Secure  increased public control  over public investment  in the railways
 by   ensuring   the   Sustainable   Transport   Authority   (STA)   takes
 responsibility  for  the  allocation of  public  funds  intended for  new
 developments  (as distinct from repair  and renewal). As part  of this we
 will prioritise  modernisation and development of the East and West Coast
 mainlines,  and a new  high-speed East Coast main  line between Aberdeen,
 London and the new Channel Tunnel Rail Link.

 Seek to  restructure Railtrack. We will ask the Competition Commission to
 review  Railtrack's activities under a  public interest reference so that
 a  suitable restructuring can be imposed on  the company. We believe that
 any  changes must simplify the  structure of our railway  system by using
 the STA  to reduce the number of franchises, and by encouraging Railtrack
 to  pass responsibility for track  renewal and repair to  the major train
 operating companies.

 Simplify  regulation.  We  will  bring  together  the role  of  the  Rail
 Regulator and  SRA within the STA. We will also seek to alter the current
 bureaucratic  penalty  system into  a  simpler scheme  of incentives.  In
 addition,  the range  of fares  that can  only be altered  with agreement
 from  the fares regulator (at  present the SRA) will  be widened. We will
 create  a new  independent body  within the  STA with  responsibility for
 timetabling.

 Improve  railway safety.  We will  implement the recommendations  made by
 Lord  Cullen's inquiry into Railway Safety. We  will create a new Railway
 Safety body  within the STA to take regulation of railway safety. We will
 also  create an accident investigation body  modelled on the Air Accident
 Investigation Branch.

 Modernise  the  London  Underground.  We believe  that  the  best way  to
 modernise  the  Underground, without  compromising safety,  is  through a
 not-for-profit,   public   interest   company   funded   through   bonds.
                                   Roads
 For  many people, roads are the backbone  of the country's transport. But
 there  has  been too  much  focus on  building  new ones  and not  enough
 attention   paid   to   the   roads   that   already  exist.   We   will:

 Boost the  repair and maintenance of roads. We are committed to improving
 the  quality of the existing network, with  the safety benefits that this
 would  bring. We will  undertake road  widening and by-pass  schemes only
 where there  are clear safety benefits and where, on balance, there is an
 environmental benefit.

 Establish  fair competition  for British  freight companies. We  will cut
 significantly  freight vehicle excise duty, funding this by introducing a
 daily  charge which includes overseas  hauliers who currently escape VED.

 Improve  road safety. We  will work  towards a target  of at least  a 40%
 reduction in  those killed and seriously injured on the roads by 2010. We
 will implement  a National Programme of Home Zones for residential areas,
 and Quiet  Lanes in rural areas. This will reduce vehicle speeds and make
 communities   safer  by  giving  greater   priority  to  pedestrians  and
 cyclists.  We will also strengthen the  enforcement of weights and safety
 standards on the road haulage industry.
                                 Aviation
 Travel  by air is  growing, raising  environmental and safety  issues. We
 will:

 Reject privatisation  of National Air Traffic Services creating instead a
 not-for-profit,   public   body   to   protect   safety   in   the   air.

 Work  to  reform aviation  fuel taxation.  We will  work at  the European
 level  to  ensure that  the whole  system  of aviation  fuel  taxation is
 reformed internationally,  as part of a longer-term strategy for reducing
 energy  use  and  pollution  through  cleaner  fuels and  more  efficient
 aircraft.  We  will also  press the  EU  Commission to  allow  removal of
 remaining   air  passenger  duty  on   flights  to  peripheral  and  less
 accessible   parts   of   the   UK   which   rely   on   air   transport.

 Restrict  noisy night flights and airport  expansion. We will ensure that
 restrictions  are imposed on  the expansion of night  flights where these
 will  have a negative impact upon residential  areas. We will also ensure
 that  there  are  clear rules  governing  future  expansion of  airports,
 strengthening   consideration   of  environmental   impacts  and   safety
 implications.

 Freedom, Justice, Honesty:
 Pensions, Wages and Benefits
 ---------------------------------           
 Poverty     restricts     freedom
 because  people without a  decent
 income do not have the                          Quick Links
 opportunities  enjoyed by others.
 More   needs  to   be  done   for       - Pensions
 pensioners  and  those  with  low     - Low Pay and
 incomes  to  ensure  that all  in                Benefits
 Britain have  a better quality of
 life.

 Liberal Democrats will:
                                            
-   Boost the  basic state
 pension,   particularly  for  the      Abolish the benefit
 over-75s                               sanctions which were brought
                                        in under the New Deal. These
-  Support disabled people      have placed harsh burdens on
                                        poor people and in many
 by extending winter fuel               cases, the children of those
 allowance    payments   to    the      penalised are the ones who
 severely disabled                      suffer the most. We will not
                                        impose further penalties
-  Help the  lower paid by      until the effects of
 aiming  to  reduce  taxation  for      penalties have been
 poorer taxpayers                       evaluated.

-  Protect workers  on low             
 incomes by  reviewing the minimum
 wage annually                          Eradicating Fuel Poverty
                                        Our homes insulation
-   Tackle  child  poverty     programme, to provide decent
 with extra  money for families on      levels of home insulation
 long-term income support               within 15 years by speeding
                                        up the current 30-year
 It  is a great indictment  of the      programme funded by the
 Governments of Margaret                energy utilities, will also
 Thatcher,  John  Major  and  Tony      cut fuel bills. This will be
 Blair  that all  of them  allowed      achieved through a targeted
 the  gap  between  rich and  poor      programme of investment
 people   in  Britain  to   become      funded by the Energy Savings
 wider  than   before.  The  Blair      Trust and the energy supply
 Government has taken a                 companies. We will work with
 disappointingly     mean-spirited      colleagues in Europe to
 approach  towards pensioners  and      agree zero-rating of VAT on
 lone   parents   in   particular.      all energy conservation
                                        materials within the EU. We
 We recognise  that there are many      will cut fuel bills and
 theatres   in  the  war   against      reduce pollution by
 poverty. Our  success in tackling      requiring all new housing to
 poverty   in  Britain  would   be      meet improved energy and
 measured  by  a  Quality of  Life      water efficiency standards
 Index.   This  would  include   a      through the use of
 statement of  the standards which      environmentally friendly
 a   citizen  of   the  UK   might      building materials and
 reasonably  expect  to  enjoy  in      techniques.
 order  to  participate  fully  in
 society   and   have   a   decent
 quality of life.
             Pensions
 Britain's   pensioners  have  not
 forgotten the  miserliness of the
 75p  increase  they were  allowed
 last   year.   Under  first   the
 Conservatives   and  now  Labour,
 the real  value of state pensions
 has  fallen further and  further.
 Elderly  people  require both  an
 immediate  substantial  boost  to
 their  incomes  and  a  guarantee
 that their  interests will always
 be  considered  not  just in  the
 run-up   to  General   Elections.

 Under  Labour, there  has been  a
 big   increase  in  means-testing
 for   pensioners.  Many   elderly
 people  are  too  proud to  claim
 money  which is  due to them.  It
 is  quite possible to  target the
 poorest    people   in    society
 without    resorting   to   means
 tests.

 Liberal Democrats will:

 Increase the  basic state pension by £5 a week for each single pensioner,
 £10  for the over-75s and £15 for the  over-80s. Couples will receive £8,
 £18  and  £28 respectively.  We will  give the  most to  older pensioners
 because they  are amongst the poorest and neediest people in the country.
 For  the past thirty years,  they have received a  derisory 25p a week at
 80  over and above the basic pension. We  will also reward pensioners who
 have saved  throughout their lives by scrapping the rules which deny help
 to people with savings above £12,000.

 Fund our  big increases in pensions by setting a new  top tax rate of 50p
 on  income over £100,000  a year.  To put this  measure into perspective,
 for  most  of  the Thatcher  years,  the  top rate  was  60p starting  on
 substantially lower incomes.

 Establish   an   Independent  Pensions   Authority.  To   guarantee  that
 pensioners  do not fall behind the rest  of the population, the Authority
 will  report annually to  the Government  on an appropriate  uprating for
 the  state  pension.  It  will  take  into account  levels  of  pensioner
 poverty,  the growth in  earnings and national  income and affordability.
 We will  also establish a more stable environment for pension planning by
 seeking  to  secure  all-party  consensus  before  making future  pension
 reforms.

 Strengthen the  position of people with private pensions by ensuring that
 members  of company  pension schemes,  including retired members,  have a
 greater  say  over the  use of  their  pension fund.  We will  also relax
 current  rules  which require  people with  personal  pensions to  buy an
 annuity on or before their 75th birthday.

 In the long term, our goal is to:

 Introduce  a new Owned Second  Pension Account. We believe  that the best
 way  to prevent poverty  among future  generations is to  ensure that all
 people  have a second pension  of their own to  top up the state pension.
 Over  time we  would ensure  that a  growing proportion of  the workforce
 were  members either of a  company pension scheme or  had an Owned Second
 Pension Account,  with the government making contributions for those who,
 because  of ill health,  unemployment or caring  responsibilities are too
 poor to do so.

 Extend  the  entitlement  to the  basic  state pension  to all  citizens.
 People  would no longer have to show a  history of contributions in order
 to  claim  their basic  pension. This  would  eventually help  around 3.4
 million  people,  mainly  women, carers  and  long-term disabled  people.

                           Low Pay and Benefits
 There  is a  great deal of  talk about  scroungers on the  welfare state.
 Liberal  Democrats will be vigilant  against those who seek  to cheat the
 system.  Equally, there are  many people  in Britain who are  in need who
 have  to  depend  on the  state.  Among  them are  low-paid workers  with
 families, lone parents and children. We will:

 Protect  workers on low  incomes by  reviewing the national  minimum wage
 annually  on the basis  of recommendations  from the Low  Pay Commission.
 The  minimum wage has  proved an  effective way of  protecting workers on
 low  incomes, without causing damage to business.  We believe it is wrong
 to  set a lower rate  minimum wage for workers under  21. We will set the
 same rate for all people aged 16 and over.

 Alleviate  child poverty  by paying  an additional  £200 per year  to all
 families  with children who have  been on income support  for more than a
 year.   Such  children  suffer  from   the  poverty  their  parents  find
 themselves  in. We will also abolish the  Child Support Agency, which has
 caused  unjustifiable hardship to so  many people, and replace  it with a
 system  of family courts. Their  maintenance assessments will be strongly
 enforced  and will supplant  the rough  justice of the  current crude and
 simplistic formula.

 Support  young  people and  reduce homelessness  by  restoring 16  and 17
 year-olds'  entitlements to  benefits and  by increasing  housing benefit
 for  the  under-25s  by ending  the  Single Room  Rent Restriction  which
 effectively requires them to share accommodation.

 Provide  more  support  for disabled  people.  We  will support  severely
 disabled  people by  bringing them  within the  scope of the  Winter Fuel
 Payment  system.   We  also  believe  that  the  benefits  system  should
 recognise  what  disabled people  can do  rather  than requiring  them to
 prove   what  they  cannot.  In   particular,  we  will  investigate  the
 feasibility  of introducing a Partial Capacity  Benefit for those able to
 do some work.

 Simplify Housing  Benefit administration and reduce the scope for benefit
 fraud  by requiring all  local authorities to  adopt effective anti-fraud
 strategies.

 End discrimination  in gas, water and electricity charges encouraging the
 regulator  to offer a wider tariff choice  which helps the poorest people
 in   society.  At  the   moment,  for  instance,   households  which  use
 pre-payment  meters end up paying higher rates  than other users. We will
 also  seek  to have  standing charges  replaced with  a banded  system of
 charging to  protect poor households and encourage high users to conserve
 energy.

 Make  cold  weather  payments to  people  receiving  income support  more
 effective  by ensuring that  they take  account of 'wind  chill' which is
 currently  overlooked. We will also seek to  take proper account of local
 weather conditions.

 In the long term, our goal is to:

 Remove taxation  for the lowest paid. We believe that people start paying
 tax at  too low a level and will work to reduce the burden of taxation on
 the low  paid. Over time, we will cut the 10p  tax rate to zero so nobody
 pays any  tax on their earnings up to £6,500. At present, this would take
 1.4 million  people on low incomes (1.1 million of whom are women) out of
 tax  altogether. Anyone  earning less  than £25,000  would pay  less tax,
 even allowing for our 1p for education.

 Establish  a  minimum  income standard  after  carrying  out research  to
 establish the appropriate amount.

 Make  the  Social  Fund  more  effective  by shifting  the  balance  from
 discretionary loans to grants.

 Freedom, Justice, Honesty:
 Innovation in Culture, Arts
 and Sport
           
 Everyone should have a freedom
 to  explore their  talents and
 experience   the   talents  of              Quick Links
 others.  The  arts  and  sport
 make  a  huge  contribution to        -Arts and Culture
 our   society.  They  play  an        -Broadcasting
 important role in both
 education  and the economy and        -Sport
 are   a  means   of  promoting
 social inclusion.

 Liberal Democrats will:                   

- Place the arts at the       Streamline government
 heart of school education            involvement in the arts by
                                      abolishing QUEST (Quality,
-    Support   community     Efficiency and Standards
                                      Team).
 sports plans
                                      Reduce interference by central
-  Promote diversity  in      government in culture and arts
 culture, the arts and sport          by decentralising
                                      decision-making powers and
                                      funding in England in order to
                                      promote community involvement
 Recent  governments  have  not       in the arts. We will also
 given  the arts  and sport the       protect the independence of
 priority  which  they deserve.       trustees of museums and
 Our goal is to make a                galleries.
 substantial     increase    in
 investment   in  the  arts  to       Remove the anomaly of Home
 enhance public access,               Office regulation of film and
 performance  opportunities and       video. We will pass this
 artistic innovation.                 responsibility to the
        Arts and Culture              Department of Culture, Media
                                      and Sport which oversees all
 We will:                             creative industries.

 Give all pupils an entitlement         
 to  arts  education throughout
 their  school careers. We will
 recruit and train more               Bring Art and Sport to the
 specialist  art  teachers  and       Centre of Communities
 ensure    that   all   primary       Our Community Arts and Sports
 teachers  are well  trained in       Fund, alongside our plans to
 the   arts.  We  will  restore       cut VAT on renovation and
 funding  for free instrumental       redevelopment will help with
 tuition   to  at   least  1990       the cost of restoring and
 levels,   giving   many   more       developing sustainable arts
 pupils  the chance to learn an       and sports facilities within
 instrument once again.               local communities where they
                                      are easily accessible.
 Protect  our cultural heritage
 by   lowering   the   cost  of
 maintaining  listed buildings.
 We will do this by cutting VAT
 on   renovation  and  repairs,
 paid  for by  introducing VAT,
 at  the same low level, on new
 building.

 Encourage artists and artistic
 diversity.   We  will  support
 artists   by  maintaining  the
 support provided by Schedule D
 taxation.  We will establish a
 fund   to  bring   artists  to
 schools, hospitals and
 prisons.

 Increase the powers of
 Regional  Arts Boards. We will
 devolve  all funding decisions
 except those involving
 national  companies  from  the
 Department  of  Culture, Media
 and Sport to the Regional Arts
 Boards.

 Develop  the use  of libraries
 by  making  them  centres  for
 free internet access.

 Invest  in local libraries, arts and  museums by replacing the Millennium
 Commission  with  a Local  Initiatives Fund  which  would give  grants to
 support  libraries, museums and galleries  in communities across Britain.
 We will  restore the principle that Lottery cash should not fund services
 more  properly  provided through  taxation, and  ensure that  all Lottery
 money  goes  to the  arts, charity,  sport,  heritage and  local cultural
 institutions.

                               Broadcasting
 High-quality  television and radio  are essential components  of a modern
 democracy  and  of  a  modern civilised  society.  But  as media  outlets
 multiply,  the current system of  regulation is increasingly ineffective.
 This  is exacerbated by  the complicated  and often overlapping  roles of
 many different regulators. We will:

 Create a  single Office of Communications (OFCOM) with the flexibility to
 regulate   emerging  communications   technologies  and   ensure  service
 provision across the country.

 Redefine  public service  broadcasting including  breadth and  quality of
 output,  distinct  regional output  and free-to-air  status.  OFCOM would
 ensure  that  these standards  are maintained  into the  future. Channels
 could  apply to be  designated public service  broadcasters, regulated by
 OFCOM,  which would then  guarantee them  the right to be  carried on all
 platforms on a profit-free basis.

 Guarantee   the  editorial  independence  of   the  BBC,  abolishing  the
 government   appointed  Board  of  Governors,   and  requiring  OFCOM  to
 recommend  a new structure  for running the BBC,  but requiring financial
 accountability through the National Audit Office.

 Create  an  additional TV  watershed at  11pm  so that  programmes highly
 unsuitable  for children could not be broadcast  until at least two hours
 after the existing 9pm watershed.

 Simplify  but tighten rules governing  cross-media ownership to ensure it
 is not concentrated in the hands of too few.

                                   Sport
 Sport  plays an important role in our aim  of raising the overall quality
 of  life of  all the  country's citizens.  Participation in  sport raises
 levels  of fitness  and health,  and helps  to foster local  and national
 pride. We will:

 Promote  Community Sports Plans. These  will stimulate local authorities,
 schools  and sports  clubs to  share facilities,  which they lack  due to
 school  fields   being  sold  off,  and  include  provisions  to  support
 so-called minority sports.

 Develop  sport  in schools.  Our simpler  minimum  curriculum entitlement
 replacing  the national curriculum will  allow greater provision of sport
 and physical education in schools.

 Freedom, Justice, Honesty:
 Business, Consumers and
 Innovation
         
 Liberal  Democrats  are  committed
 to a  free market economy in which
 enterprise   thrives.  Competition
 and  open markets  are by far  the              Quick Links
 best guarantee of wealth                - Business
 creation.  It is the  Government's
 role  to   ensure  the  conditions      - Consumers
 under    which   innovation    and      - Employees' Rights
 competition   can   flourish   and
 benefit  the  greatest  number  of
 people.

 Liberal Democrats will:                    

-  Ease  the   burdens  on     End unnecessary regulation.
 business                                We will relieve businesses
                                         of tasks which they
-  Defend consumers against      unnecessarily perform on
                                         behalf of the government,
 the power of monopolies                 like administering Working
                                         Families Tax Credit, and
-   Promote  innovation  and     collecting student loans.
 training in new technology
                                         Liberalise Sunday trading
 The  UK now  operates in a  global      laws. We will make Sunday
 market   in  which   international      opening hours a matter for
 competition  is  intense.  Liberal      local councils rather than
 Democrats'    social    objectives      for national government,
 cannot  be  achieved  without  the      within a national framework
 creation   of   wealth   and   the      to guarantee extra pay for
 promotion   of   enterprise.   The      Sunday work and protect
 Conservatives  have  always  posed      conscientious objection to
 as  the  champions of  enterprise.      Sunday working.
 But  too often  they have in  fact
 defended   vested  interests   and            
 monopoly    power.   Labour    has
 over-regulated  in some areas  and
 under-regulated     in     others.      Cutting Pollution from
 Neither  party  has really  backed      Energy Use
 new  enterprise   and  new  ideas.      The burning of fossil fuels
 Small  businesses   have  to  deal      - coal, oil and gas - is a
 with  an  avalanche  of red  tape,      major contributor to
 while  the   utility  and  railway      climate change, and also
 companies  have  been  allowed  to      causes acid rain and local
 get   away  with  far   too  much.      air pollution. Our top
                                         priorities are to reduce
 Liberal Democrats seek to               energy consumption overall,
 encourage innovation and                improving the efficiency
 risk-taking,  protect  the  rights      with which it is used, and
 of  consumers   and  workers,  and      to switch from polluting
 safeguard   the  environment.   We      forms to clean energy
 also want  to maintain the City of      sources.
 London's    pre-eminence   as   an
 international financial centre.         Reducing the Demand for
                                         Energy
              Business                   Half the energy currently
 Business  people  want  to get  on      used in the UK is wasted,
 with   running  their   companies,      and could be saved by using
 creating   wealth  and   providing      it more efficiently, in
 more   opportunities   for   their      homes, businesses and
 staff.  They  should  not have  to      transport. Our homes
 spend large  amounts of their time      insulation programme will
 acting as agents for the                improve household energy
 Government, coping with                 efficiency standards, help
 interminable    regulations    and      to eradicate fuel poverty
 filling   in  endless  forms.   We      and provide substantial new
 will:                                   employment opportunities.
                                         Mandatory standards and
                                         labels for buildings,
 Scrap     unnecessary     business      machinery, vehicles and
 regulations.  We have published  a      appliances, together with
 list of 25 specific major               lower VAT on energy
 regulations  which we will  scrap.      conservation materials,
 We  believe  any  new  regulations      will encourage householders
 should  be  subject  to a  "sunset      and businesses to cut
 clause", setting  a deadline after      energy use. We will
 which   they  would  automatically      encourage Combined Heat and
 lapse.   We   will  also   consult      Power schemes to reduce the
 business  before  introducing  any      energy wasted in power
 new measures.                           generation.

 Cut   business   rates  on   small      Taxing Energy Fairly
 businesses    by   introducing   a      The Climate Change Levy is
 Business  Rates Allowance, similar      overcomplicated and
 to  personal tax allowances.  This      bureaucratic. We will
 tax-free  allowance  would be  set      gradually replace it with a
 at  £1500 and  apply to all  small      carbon tax falling on all
 businesses. With larger                 energy use according to its
 businesses  paying  a little  more      carbon content. We will
 to  cover the cost of  the scheme,      invest in more energy
 smaller businesses  will pay less.      conservation and efficiency
                                         grants. We will introduce a
 Promote  diversity  of  ownership.      properly monitored
 We  will   initiate  a  review  of      emissions trading scheme to
 policy  governing mutual ownership      allow businesses to cut
 of  building societies,  insurance      greenhouse gas emissions in
 companies  and  credit  unions  to      the most cost-effective
 encourage  and  develop  them.  We      way, and argue for an
 will  also  review legislation  in      EU-wide scheme as soon as
 order to  stimulate employee share      feasible.
 ownership     and    cooperatives.
                                         Reduce Pollution from
 Invest    in   a   knowledge-based      Chemicals
 economy through research.               We will end UK production
 Scientific    research   is    the      and use of POPs (persistent
 cornerstone    to   a   successful      bio-accumulative
 knowledge-based     economy.    We      chemicals). We will also
 welcome  the  extra resources  the      ban the use of the most
 sector  has   already  seen  as  a      toxic chemicals.
 result    of   partnership    with
 charities  and  will further  this      Preserve Scarce Water
 by increasing government                Resources
 investment  in scientific research      We will set tough
 , paid  for by stopping taxpayers'      requirements for water
 money  being used to  help finance      companies to reduce leaks.
 arms   exports.   We  would   give      We will encourage the use
 priority  to  research on  climate      of water meters for
 change   mitigation  and   cleaner      domestic households in
 production     and     consumption      areas with scarce supplies,
 techniques, and  set up an Academy      with effective measures to
 of  British   Invention.  We  will      provide security for
 fund   the  Academy  and   provide      disadvantaged people.
 extra    money   for    scientific
 research  by  stopping the  Export      Boosting Renewable Energy
 Credit  Guarantee Department using      We will require a minimum
 taxpayers'  money to support  arms      of 10% of the UK's energy
 exports.                                to be generated from
                                         UK-based renewable energy
 Encourage     ethical     business      sources by 2010, increasing
 practice.  We want the UK  to play      by 1% a year thereafter. As
 a leading  role in seeing the OECD      well as benefiting the
 Anti-Bribery Convention                 environment, this will
 implemented  world-wide.  We  will      create thousands of new
 encourage  ethical shareholding by      jobs in the green energy
 reforming  corporate governance to      sector. Waste incineration
 enhance  stakeholders' rights.  We      will no longer be classed
 will require the largest                as renewable energy.
 companies   to  report  on   their
 social and environmental                Phasing out Nuclear Power
 performance.                            We will decommission and
                                         not replace nuclear power
 Encourage  innovation by  measures      stations as they reach the
 including  promoting links between      end of their safe operating
 academic  and industrial  research      lives. We will maintain
 and  strengthening  the  roles  of      BNFL in wholly public
 local and  regional authorities to      ownership. We will
 stimulate development and               establish an International
 implementation.                         Centre of Excellence at
                                         Dounreay to lead and spread
                                         good practice on
             Consumers                   decommissioning.

 Consumers  should   have  as  much
 choice  as possible, but  more and
 more ownership  is concentrated in
 the  hands   of  fewer  and  fewer
 companies. This has been
 particularly  true in fields  like
 banking,       telecommunications,
 broadcasting  and civil  aviation.
 Elsewhere,   large  concerns  have
 been  driving small businesses  to
 the  wall. We intend to  level the
 playing field to support
 competition and smaller
 businesses,   and  give  consumers
 more   protection   against   poor
 service   and  faulty  goods.   We
 will:

 Introduce   tough  legislation  to
 control   monopolies  and  cartels
 with a  presumption against a high
 concentration  of ownership.  Even
 in apparently competitive
 markets, anti-competitive
 behaviour  is  creating  localised
 monopolies   where,  for  example,
 supermarkets,   large   newsagents
 and  oil companies have  an unfair
 advantage  over  small  shops  and
 independents.  We will  strengthen
 the  powers   of  the  competition
 authorities  to  tackle  localised
 monopolies.

 Strengthen   consumer  protection.
 We  will introduce new  safeguards
 for  people  taking out  mortgages
 and require 'workmanship
 guarantees' in  respect of 'Cowboy
 builders'  and  garages.  We  will
 also  introduce tougher  penalties
 against  counterfeiters to protect
 the  public   from  dangerous  and
 shoddy goods.

 Tighten  controls   on  banks.  We
 will  make it a  legal requirement
 for   banks  to  look   after  the
 interests of vulnerable
 customers,   particularly  elderly
 and disabled  people, those on low
 incomes  and  those  who  live  in
 remote communities.  We will apply
 full  competition  law  to  banks,
 refer bank mergers to the
 Competition  Commission,  prohibit
 anti-competitive    cash   machine
 charges and regulate the
 clearance system.

 Review  regulation   of  the  life
 insurance  sector in the  light of
 recent  events  at Equitable  Life
 and  elsewhere,   to  protect  the
 savings  and pensions of  millions
 of people.

 Establish   a  universal   service
 obligation  for  the  Post  Office
 branch  network. Post Offices  are
 a  vital part of  all communities,
 particularly   the  more  isolated
 ones. We will ensure that
 sub-post   offices   continue   to
 offer  the  services  which  their
 customers need.

                             Employees' Rights
 Most   employers   have  no   objection  to   good  health,   safety  and
 anti-discrimination  rules. But the  law needs  to be tightened  to clamp
 down  on the small minority of companies  who exploit their workforce. We
 will  promote  a business  culture  which embraces  equal opportunity  as
 essential   to   a   committed   and   motivated   workforce.  We   will:

 Give  the Health and Safety Executive  new powers to investigate breaches
 of  its rules. We will  make businesses which flagrantly  flout the rules
 criminally   liable  for  the   consequences.  However,   we  will  train
 inspectors  to  carry  out a  range  of  inspections on  one visit  where
 possible, rather  than having several separate inspections from different
 bodies.

 Fight age  discrimination by banning compulsory retirement ages. Instead,
 we  will provide for  individuals aged  60 and over  who wish to  work to
 have  an assessment of their ability to continue their  job as part of an
 annual appraisal process.

 Review   the  minimum   wage  annually.   The  review  will   follow  the
 recommendations  of  the Low  Pay Commission.  Equal work  deserves equal
 pay,  so we will also  extend the full Minimum Wage  to all those aged 16
 and   over,  abolishing  the   lower  rate  paid  to   people  under  21.

 Promote consultation  of employees. We believe that workers should have a
 statutory  right to  consultation over  key business  decisions affecting
 their future, such as factory closures.

 Freedom, Justice, Honesty:
 Reforming Politics and the
 Constitution


 Democracy  is  the  guarantee of
 all  our freedoms, but the state                Quick Links
 of   British   democracy   still      - Voting
 leaves   much  to   be  desired.
 Liberal  Democrats want  to make      - Westminster
 government  the true  servant of    - The Nations and
 the  people, and we will develop                Regions and Local
 a political process in which all                Government
 voices can be heard.

 Liberal Democrats will:
                                        
-     Reform   the   voting
 system  for Westminster  so that       Cut the size and cost of
 every vote counts                      central government. We will
                                        reduce the number of
-   Give  Parliament  more      ministers and (as part of
                                        voting reform) cut the
 power  to hold the government to       membership of both the House
 account                                of Commons and the Upper
                                        House, while not reducing
-  Devolve  more power  to      the current size of the
 the   nations  and   regions  of       Scottish Parliament,
 Britain and to local authorities       National Assembly for Wales
                                        and the Northern Ireland
 Britain's  political  system has       Assembly. This will include
 changed  for  the  better  since       replacing separate UK
 1997.    We    have   championed       ministers for the devolved
 devolution  for over  a century,       nations of the UK with one
 so  we welcomed  the opportunity       Secretary of State for the
 to play our part in the creation       Nations and Regions.
 of  the Scottish Parliament, the
 National  Assembly for Wales and            
 the  Northern  Ireland Assembly.
 We  welcome too the introduction
 of   fairer   votes   for  these       Strengthening National
 bodies.                                Environment Policy
                                        Strengthen government
 But  the gap  between government       environment policy by
 and  the  governed is  still too       transferring the Department
 great.  Public  bodies  are  not       of Trade and Industry's
 sufficiently accountable. Voters       water and energy roles to
 do  not  have  a  strong  enough       the Department of the
 voice   or  enough   choice.  No       Environment, Transport and
 wonder that more and more people       the Regions, renamed the
 feel alienated from politics.          Department of the
                                        Environment, Energy and
              Voting                    Transport. Meanwhile,
 We  need  a voting  system which       housing, regional issues and
 accurately  reflects  the wishes       local government will move
 of  voters  and  fosters  a more       from the DETR to a new
 constructive     approach     to       Department of Local
 politics.    Liberal   Democrats       Government and the Regions.
 will:
                                        Improving Environmental
 Secure   fair   votes   for  all       Accountability
 national  and  local  elections.       An Environmental
 For  Westminster, we support the       Responsibility Act will set
 system of AV+ as proposed by the       out reporting requirements
 Jenkins  Commission  as  a first       and environmental standards
 step.  We will therefore put the       for government and
 Jenkins Commission's                   businesses, and introduce
 recommendations    before    the       environmental audits across
 British  people in  a referendum       all government departments
 at    the    earliest   possible       and local authorities where
 opportunity. Ultimately, we wish       this is not already done.
 to  see the  Single Transferable
 Vote  (STV) used for Westminster
 elections. We will introduce STV
 immediately for local government
 and European elections.

 Introduce  voting at sixteen. We
 will  also allow people to stand
 for  elected office at this age,
 the  stage in life at which they
 are able to begin full-time work
 and  pay taxes.  We will promote
 the action and habit of
 participation  earlier  in  life
 through   citizenship  education
 and school councils.

 Introduce new methods of voting.
 We will extend the right to vote
 by post and investigate internet
 voting,   while   ensuring  that
 votes  remain  secure.  We  will
 also  promote public involvement
 in    decision-making,   through
 Citizens'    Juries,   Citizens'
 Initiative     Referenda     and
 electronic         consultation.

                                Westminster
 The  Westminster  Parliament  is  not  sufficiently  accountable  to  the
 voters,   and  the   Government  is   not  sufficiently   accountable  to
 Parliament.  We will strengthen the House  of Commons and democratise the
 House of Lords. We will:

 Replace  the House of Lords  with a smaller directly  elected Senate with
 representatives  from the nations and regions of  the UK. The Senate will
 be  given  new  powers  to  improve  legislation. We  will  transfer  the
 judicial  functions currently undertaken by  the House of Lords  to a new
 Supreme Court.

 Streamline  and strengthen  the House  of Commons.  We will  increase the
 powers  of Select Committees  and allow more  pre-legislative scrutiny of
 bills.  We will give  MPs more  say over the  budget by allowing  them to
 propose  spending amendments. We  will introduce  a new annual  Tax Bill,
 separate from  the Finance Bill, to allow for greater consultation on tax
 matters.  A  new  parliamentary  commission  will  support Parliament  by
 providing expert analysis of expenditure proposals.

 Introduce  more  family  friendly  and  efficient  working practices  for
 Parliament  to bring a  wider range  of people, particularly  women, into
 Parliament.

 Carry  out a Social Justice Audit of all  bills to ensure that government
 legislation tackles inequality as a priority.

 Introduce  a Civil Service Act to maintain  the independence of the civil
 service.  We will ensure that  governments are not able  to use the civil
 service  for party political purposes  by setting clear rules  on the use
 of public money and government facilities.

 In the long term, we will:

 Develop a  written constitution for the United Kingdom in order to define
 and  protect  the constitutional  freedoms our  policies are  designed to
 achieve.

 Separate  Church and State.  We will support the  disestablishment of the
 Church  of England to end political interference  in the Church. The Head
 of   State  will  be  able  to  be  a  member   of  any  faith  or  none.

               The Nations and Regions and Local Government
 Despite  the progress made  in Scotland, Wales and  Northern Ireland, the
 United  Kingdom is still too centralised. We  will take steps towards the
 creation of  a federal United Kingdom where services are delivered at the
 lowest  level possible. This  will build a stronger  democracy within the
 UK as a whole. We will:

 Give  greater powers to  the nations  and regions. As  we move to  a more
 federal  United   Kingdom,  we  will  build  on  the  present  devolution
 settlement and  strengthen the powers of the Scottish Parliament. We will
 allow  the Welsh Assembly  the right  to pass primary  legislation and to
 vary  taxes. We will  extend tax-varying  powers to the  Northern Ireland
 Assembly  for both income  tax and  corporation tax, should  the Assembly
 wish to have those powers.

 Give the  regions of England more democratic power. We will legislate for
 referenda  on elected  regional assemblies.  If local  people vote  for a
 regional  assembly, the assembly would take on a  set of core powers from
 Westminster and  from current undemocratic regional quangos. Regions will
 normally  be based  on existing  Regional Development  Agency boundaries,
 but  with scope  for smaller  areas where  local identity,  geography and
 preferences  make that appropriate. We  would allow further devolution of
 powers and boundary changes in subsequent referenda.

 Build on  the work of the Northern Ireland peace process. We will develop
 co-operation  within the British Isles through  the Council of the Isles,
 and  we welcome the establishment of North-South  bodies in the island of
 Ireland  within  this  overall  framework. To  support  the  work of  the
 Council  we will work  to establish its own  permanent secretariat, based
 in  a central location  such as  Cardiff. We will also  seek to establish
 meetings  of  a  'Council of  the  Irish  Sea' within  this framework  to
 promote   understanding  between  representatives   of  Cardiff,  Dublin,
 Belfast,  Edinburgh, the Isle  of Man and appropriate  regions of England
 on areas such as fishing, transport and pollution.

 Allocate  funding according to need through  a Finance Commission for the
 Nations  and  Regions.  Its Revenue  Distribution  Formula will  allocate
 funds from  central government to the nations and regions on the basis of
 need. To  secure stability, there will be no cuts in current funding. Any
 changes,  which  will  happen in  the  medium-term, will  be funded  from
 growth  in the economy. Over  time, we will give  the nations and regions
 more power to raise their own money.

 Give local  people more power. We will replace the Council Tax with local
 income  tax, so that people  pay according to their  ability, and we will
 give  local  authorities more  discretion  over their  spending. We  will
 ensure  that  where local  government  acquires new  duties from  central
 government,   they  have  the  means  to   fund  them,  and  introduce  a
 constitutional   power  of  general  competence   that  will  give  local
 government  wider  scope  for  action.  We  will also  define  a  minimum
 standard  of service for  local councils  across the country.  Fair votes
 for  local elections will  prevent local  domination by one  party, which
 damages local government.

 Freedom, Justice, Honesty:
 Civil Liberties


                                          
 Civil liberties are the basis of
 a  genuinely free  society. They        Discrimination
 are   essential  to   a  liberal      Immigration and
 society   in  which  people  are                Asylum
 enabled to fulfil their
 potential   and   make  informed   The Right to Know
 choices about their lives.                      and the Right to
                                                 Privacy

 Liberal Democrats will:
                                            
 - Pass an Equality Act to
 outlaw all forms of                    Improve safeguards against
 discrimination                         the misuse of surveillance
                                        and interception powers by
 -   Reform   the   asylum     law enforcement agencies
                                        including interception and
 system  so  that  applicants are       tracking of electronic
 dealt with fairly and quickly          communications. We will
                                        replace the system of
-    Extend   Freedom   of     warrants approved by
 Information    legislation    to       Ministers with a system of
 provide genuinely open                 approval by judges to remove
 administration  at all levels of       any conflicts of interest
 government                             and to increase
                                        accountability. We believe
 Civil  liberties are at the core       that there should be a
 of  our  critique  of  the other       presumption in favour of an
 parties.   Asylum   seekers,  in       individual's freedom from
 particular, have been treated in       intrusion into their private
 a  disgraceful  manner  by  both       life and that it should be
 Labour  and  the  Conservatives.       up to the Government to
 The BSE scandal demonstrated the       prove the need for it. We
 dangers of resistance to freedom       would ensure adequate
 of    information   legislation.       safeguards against
 Labour  has made a start but has       unnecessary monitoring and
 fallen  short  of  building  the       access to private electronic
 truly  open  society we  want to       communications and review
 see.                                   the impact on the electronic
                                        commerce industry of
 We   will  establish   a  strong       Labour's Regulation of
 framework  of individual rights,       Investigatory Powers Act.
 extending the protection already
 afforded  by  European  law,  so       Repeal Section 28 of the
 that the rights of the                 1988 Local Government Act.
 individual outweigh the                This gives legal sanction to
 interests of the government.           discrimination, preventing
                                        schools taking effective
          Discrimination                measures against bullying
 We will combat discrimination on       and hampering responsible
 the  grounds of race  and in all       sex education.
 its other forms. We will:

 Strengthen   the  fight  against            
 discrimination  with an Equality
 Act.   This  will  fight  unfair       Improving Environmental
 discrimination    on    whatever       Knowledge
 grounds,  including  race,  sex,       A 'Right to Environmental
 religion,   sexual  orientation,       Information', as part of
 disability,    age   or   gender       Freedom of Information
 identity.    A    new   Equality       legislation, will cover
 Commission   will  be   able  to       issues such as local air
 investigate  potential  breaches       quality, emissions from
 of  the Act  and take  action in       local factories, and the
 its  own  name.  The  Commission       potential environmental
 will  also  have  responsibility       risks from Genetically
 for Children's Rights, through a       Modified Organisms (GMOs).
 Children's  Rights Commissioner.       We will also introduce a
 We  will also  create a separate       duty to electronic
 Human   Rights   Commission   to       publication of environmental
 safeguard human rights.                information.

 Support recent European                Protecting Protest
 anti-discrimination legislation.       We will protect the right to
 We   will  back  measures  under       legal and peaceful protest
 Article  13  of  the  Treaty  of       on all issues, including
 Amsterdam on                           environmental matters.
 anti-discrimination.        This
 includes   race  and  employment       Protecting Animals
 legislation and action.                Although we support firm
                                        action against violent
 Establish a scheme for the civil       protests by animal rights
 registration   of  partnerships.       activists, we are committed
 This  will  give  two  unrelated       to strengthening animal
 adults  who  wish to  register a       welfare. We will establish
 settled  personal  relationship,       an Animal Protection
 legal rights, such as                  Commission to strengthen
 next-of-kin  arrangements  which       animal welfare protection.
 are at present only available to       We will extend the size and
 married couples.                       powers of the Home Office
                                        Inspectorate and encourage
                                        more unannounced
      Immigration and Asylum            inspections. We will end the
 Immigrants    are    too   often       use of animals in the
 labelled   as   a   problem  for       development and testing of
 British   society.  Britain  has       weapons and household goods,
 benefited hugely from                  and end unnecessary
 immigration,  in  the  same  way       repetitive tests. We will
 that   many  Britons   who  have       fund research into
 emigrated  have  benefited  from       alternatives to animal
 their   experience.   There  are       testing. We believe that
 practical as well as                   farm animals should be
 humanitarian     reasons     for       entitled to high welfare
 treating   immigrants  decently.       standards. We will provide
 The  shortage of skilled workers       more customs officers with
 in  many fields  means they have       Convention on International
 an   important  contribution  to       Trade in Endangered Species
 make   to  British  society.  We       training so that the law can
 will:                                  be enforced more
                                        effectively. We believe that
 Protect   people   fleeing  from       the issue of hunting with
 persecution   by   dealing  with       hounds should be settled by
 asylum  applications  fairly and       MPs on a free vote.
 more  quickly,  which  will also
 minimise  any  opportunities for
 anyone  to  exploit  either  the
 system  or  asylum  seekers.  We
 will introduce fair benefits for
 asylum  seekers  to  replace the
 demeaning   voucher  system.  We
 will review the failing
 dispersal    system,   end   any
 unnecessary    restrictions   on
 asylum    seekers    undertaking
 voluntary    work   and   review
 restrictions  on  paid  work  by
 asylum  seekers  in  their first
 six months. Recognising
 pressures  on  host communities,
 we   will   ensure   that  local
 services are adequately
 compensated   for  the  cost  of
 supporting  asylum  seekers.  We
 will  work with  other countries
 to  ensure that responsibilities
 are sensibly shared, and to seek
 a   system   which   discourages
 illegal  trafficking  in people.

 Free   immigration   laws   from
 discrimination.  We  will ensure
 that   immigration   policy   is
 non-discriminatory     in    its
 application.   We   will  reform
 current immigration laws so that
 families  are  not  divided.  We
 will   also   regularly   review
 immigration   policy,   separate
 from   our  asylum  obligations,
 including   an   assessment   of
 skills  needs of  the country in
 an  increasingly global economy.

  The Right to Know and the Right
            to Privacy
 While  individuals  should  have
 the  right  to know  as  much as
 possible  about  decisions taken
 by  government, there  should be
 limits  to the information which
 government   can   obtain  about
 individuals. We will:

 Strengthen Freedom of
 Information   legislation.  This
 will  break  open  the excessive
 secrecy    of   government   and
 develop   open  and  accountable
 administration.  In  particular,
 it will increase access to facts
 and figures underlying
 government  policy decisions and
 reduce   ministers'   powers  to
 block the release of
 information.

 Protect  privacy.  Privacy is  protected  by the  European Convention  on
 Human  Rights which is  now incorporated  into UK law. We  are opposed to
 further  privacy  laws which  could threaten  free  speech, except  for a
 civil offence  of physical intrusion to prevent harassment of individuals
 by  the media. We will not  introduce compulsory national identity cards.

 Bring  the security services under  parliamentary control. At the moment,
 the security  services are overseen by a committee reporting to the Prime
 Minister.  We  will  make  them  accountable  to a  Parliamentary  Select
 Committee.

 Freedom, Justice, Honesty:
 Rural, Urban and Suburban Life


 Outside   their   family,   most               Quick Links
 people's    immediate   concerns       - Building Strong
 involve   the  local   community                Local Communities
 where they  live, work, shop and
 spend  their  leisure  time.  We      - Supporting Farming
 wish    to   build   sustainable                and Fisheries
 communities  which  provide  for      - Supporting Local
 the  needs  of  their  citizens,                Economies
 enhance    their   lives,    and      - A Decent Living
 preserve the environment.                       Environment

 Liberal Democrats will:
                                            
- Boost  local economies
 by   protecting  local  services      Lessen central controls on
 and promoting local innovation        fishing by reforming the
                                       Common Fisheries Policy to
- Support rural                promote local management of
                                       fisheries.
 employers, farming and fishing
                                       Reduce red tape for farmers
 [bullet]  Revive depressed areas      through single Countryside
 by    introducing   a   one-stop      Management Contracts to
 regeneration   grant  system  to      manage farm payments, and an
 distribute funds more                 Agricultural Ombudsman to
 effectively                           tackle maladministration.

-  Create  incentives for      Put local priorities first
                                       in planning regeneration
 developers to build on                schemes so that communities
 brownfield rather than                develop according to the
 greenfield sites                      aspirations of those that
                                       live there.
 Margaret   Thatcher  notoriously
 remarked   "there  is  no   such
 thing  as  society".  It was  an            
 attitude which weakened
 communities   all  over  Britain      Reducing Waste and Promoting
 during  the Conservative  years.      Recycling
 Now,  in   many  communities  in      Our National Recycling
 Britain,    there   is   growing      Programme will provide a
 dissatisfaction    with   Labour      doorstep recycling
 too.  In   rural  areas,  people      collection for every
 feel that  the Labour Party does      household by the end of the
 not  understand their needs.  In      next Parliament. We will
 much of  urban Britain, arrogant      seek to recycle 60% of
 and    complacent   old   Labour      household waste within 10
 councils  are out of  touch with      years. We will also
 local people.                         gradually increase the
                                       landfill tax to encourage
 Our  opponents  want to  control      alternative methods of
 from  the centre. We  will allow      disposal, backed up by an
 communities  to  make  decisions      eventual ban on all but
 for  themselves, while providing      certain types of waste. We
 high-quality     services    and      will not build incinerators
 protecting the environment.           unless results of research
       Building Strong Local           on their impact shows that
           Communities                 they are safe and the best
 The  strongest local communities      environmental option.
 are  built  on  the  actions  of
 individuals     within     them.      Floods and Flooding
 Government  should not interfere      We will immediately set up a
 and  hamper  their  efforts.  It      National Task Force to
 can  nonetheless play a  role in      review arrangements for
 stimulating    and    supporting      flood defence management and
 communities. We will:                 response. We will also use
                                       planning measures to reduce
                                       future developments taking
 Regenerate  deprived communities      place on floodplains and
 wherever  they   are  through  a      improve standards of
 one-stop    regeneration   grant      drainage from both urban and
 system.  This  would  streamline      rural (particularly
 existing  regeneration measures,      agricultural) land use. In
 including   Regional   Selective      the long term, flooding will
 Assistance, English                   continue to become more
 Partnerships  and  the New  Deal      severe unless climate change
 for Communities.  The new single      is tackled effectively -
 scheme  will help  match-funding      which our energy and
 applications  and  simplify  the      transport policies are
 application  and appeal process.      designed to do.
 We will ensure that all
 regeneration  schemes are  truly      Guard Against Possible
 in line  with the aspirations of      Dangers of GM Crops
 the    communities   they    are      We will seek to introduce a
 designed to help by                   moratorium, at an EU level,
 strengthening  local  democratic      on commercial growing of
 input    into   decision-making.      genetically modified crops
                                       until 2004, to allow
 Boost  rural  local services  by      research into their safety
 directing more  money to provide      and environmental impact to
 high-quality  services, such  as      be completed.
 schools  and  post  offices,  to
 the  rural  population. We  will      Protect our Seas
 do  this  by  reforming  funding      We will develop a national
 formulae to ensure that               oceans and coasts policy in
 resources  are allocated  fairly      consultation with scientists
 throughout   the   UK,  and   by      and the fishing industry to
 giving     local     authorities      provide sustainable
 greater  financial freedoms.  We      livelihoods and prosperity
 will    tackle   rural    social      for coastal communities,
 exclusion by providing                improved health of the seas
 employment  opportunities in new      for wildlife and a safer
 industries  and  in farming  for      environment for marine
 the young.                            activities. This will
                                       include a network of Marine
 Help   everyone  feel  safe   in      Protected Areas covering 10
 their  homes.  People living  in      per cent of our seas and
 inner    city   housing   blocks      piloting Fishing-Free Zones
 across    the   country   suffer      to help the recovery of fish
 unacceptable levels  of crime on      stocks. We will underpin
 their   own  doorsteps   because      this by introducing
 there  is no  secure front  door      consolidated marine
 on  the building  in which  they      legislation in collaboration
 live.   We  will  give   a  high      with the devolved
 priority    to   tackling    the      institutions of the UK. We
 security   of  these   buildings      will also implement
 through  our  "Safe Front  Doors      pollution reduction and
 for  All" initiative,  organised      prevention programmes to
 as  part   of  our  wider  crime      meet targets under the OSPAR
 prevention programme.                 convention by 2020.

                                       Boost Conservation Schemes
      Supporting Farming and           We will protect the
            Fisheries                  environment and create
                                       'green jobs' in urban, rural
 Many   communities  are   highly      and marine habitats, for
 dependent  on   a  single  local      example, through more
 industry.  In  many areas,  this      organic farming, increasing
 means  fishing  or  agriculture.      green spaces in urban areas,
 Government  could be doing  much      and woodland management.
 more  to support  both. We  have      Such schemes will form part
 already  published an  emergency      of our Wildlife Guarantee to
 programme  to  help farmers  and      protect endangered species.
 businesses   who  have  suffered      We will also aim to preserve
 during   the   foot  and   mouth      and increase the area of
 crisis.  On the other  issues we      greenfield sites in the UK.
 will:
                                       Reform Planning
 Reform  the Common  Agricultural      We will ensure that local
 Policy. Reform  is long overdue.      authority structure plans
 We will promote the                   incorporate targets for CO2
 sustainability   of  agriculture
 and  redirect  support  so  that      emission reductions to
 small and  family farms are more      encourage the development of
 effectively  supported. We  will      renewable energy facilities
 seek  to   refocus  payments  on      and account for the climate
 achieving  public, environmental      change consequences of their
 and  social  goals  rather  than      policies, including
 encouraging unnecessary               transport.
 production,   while  maintaining
 the  current  overall  level  of      Protect Green Spaces
 support  for  farmers and  rural      We will create a new
 areas.   We  will  work   within      designation of Protected
 Europe  to limit bureaucracy  by      Site, with equivalent
 administering    CAP    payments      protection to Sites of
 through   a  single  Countryside      Specific Scientific
 Management  Contract which would      Interest, for green areas of
 include stewardship and               particular importance or
 agri-environment    schemes   as      value to the community. We
 well as support for                   will manage SSSIs to enhance
 diversification,         organic      their environmental value
 farming and farmers                   and impose a binding 'duty
 co-operatives.                        of care' on owners and
                                       tenants to avoid further
 Protect    tenant   farmers   by      significant damage or
 funding    a   targeted    early      fragmentation.
 retirement   and   new   entrant
 scheme    and   by   reassessing
 diversification    schemes    to
 allow  tenants   more  scope  to
 diversify.

 Encourage   organic  farming  by
 better  support  for  transition
 from current methods of
 farming.

 Reform    the   present   Common
 Fisheries   Policy.   The   main
 objective  of  fisheries  policy
 must   be   to   integrate   the
 long-term  conservation  of  the
 marine   environment  with   the
 socio-economic    interests   of
 local  communities.  We want  to
 establish   Regional  Management
 Committees     through     which
 fishermen    would   work   with
 scientists   and  government  to
 agree   sustainable  and  fairly
 enforced  'zonal management' for
 their  local fisheries. We  will
 make  the case for  establishing
 the  6-12 mile fishing  limit as
 a  permanent feature of  policy,
 and  work   with  other  fishing
 nations  to agree to  extend the
 national  protection  zones  out
 to 24  miles. We will strengthen
 and    update   the   regulatory
 framework   for  Seas  Fisheries
 Committees  and take low  impact
 fishing   methods  out  of   the
 quota     system     altogether.

 Abolish the Ministry of
 Agriculture,  Fisheries and Food
 with  its numerous conflicts  of
 interests  which have  prevented
 it  from effectively  addressing
 issues  such  as  BSE, GM  crops
 and foot  and mouth. Instead, we
 will   create  a  Ministry   for
 Rural  Affairs  to  promote  the
 interests of  the countryside as
 a    whole.   An    agricultural
 ombudsman  will protect farming,
 and  food safety issues  will be
 the    responsibility   of   the
 Department  of  Health  and  the
 Food Standards Agency.

    Supporting Local Economies
 Local   economies  operate  most
 effectively when  there is local
 innovation  and money circulates
 locally  in a  diverse range  of
 small  businesses providing  for
 local  needs.  Strong  voluntary
 and    non-governmental   bodies
 also   enrich   and   strengthen
 these   communities.  We   will:

 Support  local markets including
 farmers   markets  by  providing
 funds  from Single  Regeneration
 Grants   to   regenerate   local
 shopping   areas,  preserving  a
 diverse range  of retail outlets
 and  encouraging flexibility  in
 planning     regulations     for
 smaller outlets.

 Tackle  financial  exclusion  by
 promoting   community   banking,
 Local   Exchange   and   Trading
 Schemes   (LETS),   and   credit
 unions.  We  will  also  support
 initiatives such as the
 Community  Loan  Fund in  Wales.

 Encourage     volunteering    by
 setting  up a network  of mutual
 volunteering  exchanges or 'time
 banks'   through  which   people
 could    exchange   time   spent
 volunteering,         registered
 through  the  local  time  bank,
 with  help   for  themselves  or
 discounts  on  public  transport
 and sports facilities.

 Protect  village pubs and  local
 breweries  by extending the  50%
 mandatory  rate relief currently
 enjoyed  by  some village  shops
 and   post   offices   to   sole
 village   pubs   and   encourage
 wider  use  of  local  authority
 powers   to   grant   additional
 discretionary     relief     for
 services     and     businesses.

 Promote tourism.  We will bring together the marketing and infrastructure
 work  of government, local  councils and  tourist boards. We  will ensure
 that  local communities are involved in the  planning of tourism from the
 earliest stages.

                        A Decent Living Environment
 The  quality   of  life  for  all  people  depends  very  much  on  their
 surroundings  -  the quality  and cost  of their  housing, the  fabric of
 nearby buildings,  and their natural surroundings. To promote a clean and
 healthy living environment we will:

 Promote decent  and more affordable housing. We will open up conveyancing
 to  greater  competition,  take action  to  tackle gazumping,  strengthen
 leaseholders' legal  rights, involve tenants in the management of housing
 estates,  and protect tenants  against misuse  of rent deposits.  We will
 allow  local authorities to specify the  percentage of social housing for
 all  new developments.  We will  aim to  provide lifetime homes  and make
 sure  that  building  regulations provide  for  flexibility to  undertake
 low-cost  conversion for wheelchair  access, fittings,  showers and stair
 lifts.  We will give  local councils the  power to end the  50% rebate on
 council tax for second homes.

 Combat  homelessness  by  giving  local  authorities  greater freedom  to
 invest  in  housing, and  by  making health  authorities responsible  for
 ensuring  that patients discharged  into the community  have somewhere to
 live.  We will increase the availability  of affordable housing by taking
 action to  require public and private landlords to bring empty homes back
 into use.  We will make renovation a more affordable option by equalising
 VAT   at  a  lower  level  to  be  charged   equally  on  new  build  and
 refurbishment costs.

 Protect  greenfield   sites  and  encourage  urban  regeneration  through
 partnership  between local  authorities and  private enterprise,  and our
 reform  of the VAT  system. In  addition to an immediate  cut in business
 rates  through  a  Business  Rate Allowance,  we  will  also allow  local
 councils to  replace the Uniform Business Rate with a system based on the
 value of  each site (Site Value Rating). This would encourage rather than
 penalise  those  who  develop inner-city  sites.  We will  also clean  up
 brownfield  and damaged  wildlife sites  using revenue from  a greenfield
 development levy set by local authorities.

 Require  mobile phone companies  to obtain local  planning permission for
 all new mobile phone mast installations.

 Establish  effective measurement of living  costs throughout the country.
 We  want to ensure that  public service workers like  teachers and nurses
 are  properly  supported  when  they live  in  expensive  areas. We  will
 therefore  collect  data  on price  variations  between  regions so  that
 measures can be effectively targeted.

 Freedom, Justice, Honesty:
 Britain's Role in the European
 Union

 The European Union has a
 fundamental  role in  guaranteeing
 peace  and freedom  in Europe.  By
 promoting  enterprise,  protecting
 the   environment   and   fighting
 discrimination,   the  EU   brings               
 enormous benefits  to Britain. Yet
 neither  Conservative  nor  Labour
 governments have  made the most of
 Britain's  potential   as  a  core
 member of the EU.

 Our priorities in Europe are:
                                             
-  Enlargement of the EU to
 include  the emerging  democracies      Remove unnecessary
 of central and eastern Europe           regulations and reduce
                                         administrative costs. We
-    Reform  of   the  EU's     support moves to streamline
                                         the role of the EU
 institutions  to  make  them  more      Commission and to
 open, democratic and effective          strengthen measures against
                                         fraud. We will push for
- Reaching agreement  on a      obligatory regulatory
 constitutional    settlement   for      impact assessments on all
 Europe  to  define  and limit  the      new EU proposals with a
 powers of the EU                        direct bearing on
                                         businesses. We will also
-   Co-operation  with  our     stop the practice of
                                         'goldplating' EU
 European Liberal Democrat               regulations, whereby the UK
 partners  to achieve  our aims  in      government unnecessarily
 these areas                             adds requirements to
                                         minimum EU standards.
 Liberal    Democrats   are    firm
 supporters of  the European Union,
 but  as  critical  members of  the           
 European family,  we are also firm
 on  its failings. We  believe that      Putting the Environment at
 the  EU offers  the best means  of      the Heart of Europe
 promoting  Britain's interests  in      All EU policies should be
 Europe  and  in  the wider  world.      analysed for their likely
 Nations    acting   together   can      environmental impact, with
 achieve more.                           results reported to the
                                         European Parliament. This
 The  EU  must  have the  resources      is particularly important
 and  powers to act in  areas where      for EU overseas aid, where
 problems  cannot  be  solved at  a      we will support the
 national  level.   But  it  should      establishment of a
 stay  clear  when European  action      specialised European aid
 is not necessary.                       agency. All member states
                                         must comply fully with EU
 Europe  needs  a  new  agenda  for      environmental standards,
 reform.   Liberal  Democrats   are      and the European Court of
 determined   that  Britain  should      Justice should apply higher
 lead   this  reform.  We   want  a      fines to those failing to
 Europe  where   the  interests  of      comply. We will support the
 people    not   bureaucrats   come      initiative started at the
 first;  a  Europe  that  seeks  to      Cardiff summit to integrate
 empower  people,  not impose  upon      environmental objectives
 them; and where European                into all EU activities -
 institutions  concentrate on  what      particularly in the area of
 they do best. We will work to:          trade policy, where the
                                         Commission has sole
 Establish  a Constitution for  the      competence to negotiate on
 European   Union  to  define   and      the EU's behalf.
 limit   the  powers   of  the   EU
 ensuring  that decisions are  made      Strengthening Europe's
 at the  most appropriate level. It      Voice on the Global
 would set out the roles,                Environment
 responsibilities and  powers of EU      We will argue for the EU to
 institutions    in   relation   to      play a greater role in
 members  states. It would  provide      raising environmental
 a stable  and legitimate framework      standards world-wide,
 to    reinforce   democracy    and      through providing support
 restore  public confidence in  the      for the UN Environment
 EU.  The  Charter  of  Fundamental      Programme and for the
 Rights  should be at the  heart of      enforcement of
 a    Constitution   for    Europe.      environmental conventions,
                                         such as those protecting
                                         endangered species,
 Focus the  scope of European Union      combating climate change,
 action.  We  need  to improve  the      and controlling the trade
 quality  of EU governance.  The EU      in GM products.
 should   focus  its  policy-making
 only  on  those  areas  for  which
 EU-wide  action is  indispensable.
 This  means   ensuring   that  the
 principle   of   subsidiarity   is
 fully    respected.   A   standing
 scrutiny committee in the
 European   Parliament  should   be
 established  to   ensure  that  EU
 proposals  meet  the  criteria  of
 subsidiarity  and proportionality.

 Make the  European Commission more
 democratically   accountable.  The
 Commission  President's 'State  of
 the   Union'   speech  should   be
 accompanied by  a detailed list of
 proposals,  individually justified
 and   explained.   Each   new   EU
 legislative     proposal    should
 include a  justification of why EU
 action  is   necessary.  The  work
 programme  should   be  put  to  a
 substantive  vote by the  European
 Parliament   in  plenary  session.
 The  committees  of  the  European
 Parliament   should  be  able   to
 cross-examine individual
 commissioners   on  the  proposals
 under  their  responsibility.  The
 European  Parliament  should  have
 the  power  to  vet and  veto  the
 appointment  of   each  and  every
 commissioner  and,  if  necessary,
 sack   individual   Commissioners.

 Make  sure   that  European  Union
 bodies  are   more  open.  All  EU
 institutions   should  conform  to
 the   principles  of  freedom   of
 information.    The   Council   of
 Ministers  should  meet in  public
 whenever  it discusses legislation
 and   publish  a  record   of  its
 proceedings.  The political leader
 of   the   country   holding   the
 Presidency    of   the    European
 Council   should  be  obliged   to
 appear before  the plenary session
 of  the  European Parliament  both
 before  and after all  meetings of
 the European Council.

 Maintain  the veto in  areas of vital  interest to the UK.  We favour the
 application  of majority voting in the  Council where necessary to ensure
 that  the EU functions  effectively. But  we will maintain a  veto on the
 constitution,  defence,  own  resources, budgetary  and  tax matters  and
 regulations on pay and social security.

 Improve  Westminster's  scrutiny  of  European  legislation  and  of  the
 activities  of  UK ministers  attending the  Council of  Ministers. There
 should  be  no substantial  initiatives for  European legislation  in the
 Council  of   Ministers  which  have  not  been  scrutinised  by  the  UK
 Parliament. Ministers,  including the Prime Minister should give evidence
 before  a  European  Union  Affairs  Committee  in Westminster  prior  to
 European  Council  meetings  and any  significant  meeting of  ministers.

 Increase the  transparency of the European Central Bank. The Board of the
 Bank should  publish its minutes and votes, following the practice of the
 Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee.

 Support  a European Common  Foreign and  Security Policy that  includes a
 significant  defence capability  consistent with  our membership  of NATO
 and other international institutions.

 Hold  meetings of  the European  Parliament only  in Brussels to  end the
 waste  of  time and  money incurred  by  holding meetings  in Strasbourg.

 Push for  early enlargement of the EU. The nations of central and eastern
 Europe  have  now been  waiting over  ten  years for  the  opportunity to
 benefit  from EU  membership. We  will seek  to ensure  that there  is no
 further  slippage  in  accession  schedules  dependent  upon meeting  the
 Copenhagen  criteria such as guaranteeing democracy,  the rule of law and
 human rights.

 Freedom, Justice, Honesty:
 Defence and International
 Institutions

 Britain  can  achieve far  more
 by  working  with  others  than
 working alone. An                              Quick Links
 internationalist   approach  is      - Foreign Policy
 the  best  way  to protect  our
 freedom  and our interests.  We    - International
 will  work  to build  effective                Security
 international    and   regional       - Defence
 organisations  to promote peace     - Trade, Aid and
 and   freedom  throughout   the                International
 world,   combat   poverty   and                Development
 disease   and   tackle   global
 environmental problems.

 Liberal Democrats will:

-    Promote   a  foreign
 policy   based  on   democracy,      Stop using taxpayers' money
 human rights and good                to support the arms trade by
 governance                           ending subsidies for arms
                                      sold to foreign regimes.
- Seek to make
 international      institutions              
 more  able  to  address  global
 security, trade and                  Global Climate Change
 environmental issues                 We will place Britain at the
                                      forefront of climate change
-         Resist     further  negotiations, pressing other
 erosion  of  Britain's  defence      nations to ratify and
 capability  while  co-operating      implement the 1997 Kyoto
 more closely with the                protocol by the Rio+10 world
 country's allies                     summit in mid 2002. We will
                                      seek to extend its terms and
 Events  in one nation  can have      targets further. We will
 a  profound impact  on life  in      ensure that Britain achieves
 other  countries. The world  is      its target well before the
 no longer one of                     deadline, and establishes a
 self-contained  nation  states.      new target of a 20% reduction
 Britain  has  too  often  given      in CO2 emissions by 2010.
 aid and comfort to
 authoritarian   regimes   which      Introduce Stronger
 oppress    their   people   and      Environmental Objectives
 threaten  world stability.  And      into the Common Agricultural
 as    Britain's   own   defence      Policy, lending and
 capability  has  weakened,  the      investment policies of the
 country  has been slow  to pool      IMF, World Bank and regional
 resources with its allies.           development banks. WTO rules
         Foreign Policy               should respect environmental
                                      principles as long as these
 Britain  stands  at the  centre      are applied in a
 of a web of global                   non-protectionist way.
 institutions.   Our  membership
 of  the  UN  Security  Council,      Promote Sustainable
 the   Commonwealth,   the   EU,      Development
 NATO,  and other global  bodies      We will ensure that
 gives  Britain  a  key role  in      environmental and social
 world  affairs. But with  power      sustainability is a prime
 comes responsibility.                objective of aid and
                                      technology transfer policies.
 We  must not  turn a blind  eye
 to    injustice   nor   support      Improving Environmental
 authoritarian   regimes   which      Governance
 oppress    their   people   and      The Rio+10 summit in 2002 is
 threaten    world    stability.      an opportunity to improve the
 Britain's  influence should  be      international community's
 used to  fight for human rights      ability to tackle
 and   equitable  and   peaceful      environmental threats. We
 relationships  between nations.      want a substantial increase
                                      in resources for the UN
 The  Liberal Democrat  approach      Environment Programme and for
 puts  democratic values,  human      the implementation of
 rights  and good governance  at      environmental agreements. We
 the  top of the  foreign policy      also advocate a UN Economic
 agenda. We will:                     and Environmental Security
                                      Council for Sustainability.

 End subsidies  for arms sold to
 foreign  regimes.  We will  put
 an  end  to the  use of  Export
 Credit  Guarantees  to  support
 arms exports. We will
 establish  a Parliamentary Arms
 Export   Committee  to  monitor
 arms   exports  and  scrutinise
 individual licence
 applications.  We will  require
 arms brokers  to register under
 a  Code of Conduct,  and revoke
 the   licences  of  those   who
 break the code.

 Take  account  of human  rights
 and    development   needs   in
 government   policy.  We   will
 audit    relevant    government
 departments   to  ensure   that
 policies  on   issues  such  as
 aid,  arms   sales  and  credit
 guarantees   conform   to   the
 standards we have set.

 Give   priority   to   conflict
 prevention. It  should focus on
 traditional threats to
 security but also the
 consequences  of  environmental
 degradation, resource
 depletion,   volatile   markets
 and  unfair  trade.  Preventive
 diplomacy   will  be  given   a
 higher priority  in the budgets
 of the Foreign and
 Commonwealth Office,
 Department   for  International
 Development   and  Ministry  of
 Defence.

 Continue   the  fight   against
 slave labour. We will
 co-operate  with  international
 bodies  like the  International
 Labour  Organisation  to  stamp
 out slavery.

 Maintain  funding  for the  BBC
 World  Service and the  British
 Council.  We  will ensure  that
 these  two organisations, which
 have a  vital role in spreading
 the   values  of  freedom   and
 democracy,    receive    proper
 funding.

                          International Security
 We  favour greater international  co-operation to make the  world a safer
 place   and  to  uphold  human  rights   in  other  countries.  We  will:

 Seek to  strengthen the powers of the UN. The UN needs a more active role
 in holding  member states to account for gross and persistent breaches of
 the  Universal Declaration of  Human Rights. Too many  UN Conventions and
 Security  Council resolutions  are flouted  and ignored. We  propose that
 the  Secretary   General  conducts  an  audit  to  determine  outstanding
 obligations and the action needed to comply with them.

 Ensure that  the United Nations has the resources to act. We will promote
 the  establishment  of  a Staff  College  based  in Britain  to train  UN
 peacekeepers.  We  also advocate  the formation  of  a UN  Rapid Reaction
 Disaster  Task  Force  to tackle  both  man-made  and natural  disasters.

 Work  with  Britain's  partners  in  the  Commonwealth to  make  it  more
 effective   in  promoting   conflict  resolution,  good   governance  and
 democratic values.

 Support  the International  Criminal Court.  If it  is powerful  and well
 resourced,  the Court will enhance human  rights. We will press opponents
 of the court to recognise its authority.

                                  Defence
 We are  proud of Britain's record of defending democracy, and to remember
 those who  have given their lives, we will make the day after Remembrance
 Sunday  a public holiday. British armed  forces rightly enjoy the respect
 of  the world. It  is essential  to preserve that reputation.  But as the
 country's  own defence capability  has shrunk  since the end  of the Cold
 War,  it   has  been  slow  to  pool  resources  with  allies.  Britain's
 capabilities  must continue to adapt  to meet the challenges  of the 21st
 Century. We will:

 Resist  further erosion of  our defence capability. We  will maintain the
 current   level   of  spending   and  resist   any   further  reductions.

 Promote  flexibility, mobility, rapid deployment  and joint operations as
 the  basis  of  Britain's defence  policy,  to  enable the  UK to  honour
 Britain's  commitments  to the  EU, NATO,  the  Commonwealth and  the UN.

 Promote  equal opportunities and  family welfare in the  armed forces. We
 will  oppose unfair discrimination in the  forces. We will review welfare
 policies  in order to  set minimum  and consistent standards  that can be
 applied at home and abroad for service families.

 Work  for the elimination worldwide of all  nuclear weapons. We will urge
 a  new round of  multilateral arms  reduction talks, but  will retain the
 UK's   minimum    nuclear   deterrent   for   the   foreseeable   future.

 Oppose  the National Missile  Defence System (NMD).  The system currently
 being proposed  by the USA represents a threat to international stability
 and arms control agreements.

 Put  in place a  moratorium on  the use of Depleted  Uranium Shells until
 there   is   clear  evidence   regarding  the   health   risks  involved.

                 Trade, Aid and International Development
 Genuinely  liberal trade benefits  all the  countries of the  world, rich
 and  poor. We will press for a fairer global  trading system, and do more
 to  assist poor nations.  We advocate  effective aid policies  to address
 the  problems  of developing  countries  and promote  democracy and  good
 governance. We will:

 Promote  genuine  liberal trade.  The removal  of  barriers to  trade has
 stimulated  economic growth and prosperity  throughout much of the world,
 and  the  World  Trade Organisation  has  helped  establish and  maintain
 international  rules  which guarantee  equal treatment  for  all members,
 large or  small. However, trade liberalisation has sometimes been pursued
 at  the expense of other objectives,  such as environmental protection or
 public  health.  We will  work to  reform the  WTO so  that environmental
 objectives  and principles are  fully integrated into  its activities and
 poorer   countries   are   helped   to   participate   fully  within   it

 Encourage  fair  competition. We  would  press for  a global  competition
 authority   within   the   WTO  to   encourage   co-ordination  of   the
 anti-monopoly  activities  of individual  nations to  tackle  the growing
 concentration  of  corporate  monopoly power  more  effectively. We  want
 world-wide agreement  to reduce subsidies, common in areas such as fossil
 fuel   production,  agriculture,  forestry  and   fisheries:  this  would
 encourage  trade, open  markets to  poorer countries' exports  and reduce
 environmental damage.

 Honour  the UK's commitment to meet the  UN target of increasing overseas
 aid  to 0.7% over the  next ten years. We  support the moves already made
 by  the British Government to reduce the  debts of the poorest countries.
 But  Britain could lead more  rapid action on debt  relief by bodies such
 as  the International  Monetary Fund  and the  World Bank.  Their Poverty
 Reduction  Strategy Programmes should attach  at least as much importance
 to  governments taking action to tackle  poverty as to liberalising their
 economies

 End  links between  aid and trade.  Tied aid  is a form  of protectionism
 which  inhibits  development.  We  will  subject  all aid  programmes  to
 thorough  assessment  for their  environmental, social  and  human rights
 consequences.

 Direct   aid   towards  women.   Women  in   developing   countries  face
 discrimination  and economic exclusion.  All aid  packages should address
 gender  inequality with a high priority  for family planning and maternal
 health services.

 Step  up  the  fight against  HIV/AIDS.  The  AIDS pandemic  is a  global
 emergency   which   undermines   economic   development   and   threatens
 international  security. We will increase  backing for the development of
 an  AIDS  vaccine. Working  with bodies  such  as the  churches,  we will
 support   large-scale  AIDS/HIV   education  programmes  and   press  for
 mother-to-child  AIDS  treatment  drugs  to  be  made available  cheaply.

 Promote  universal primary education. Education  is essential to economic
 development. We  will spearhead initiatives to increase the resources for
 basic education  in developing countries. In return for financial support
 recipient  countries  should be  obliged to  reduce expenditure  on arms.

 Implement  the OECD convention  on bribery.  We will allow  UK registered
 companies  to  be  prosecuted for  bribery  offences committed  overseas.

 Freedom, Justice, Honesty:
 Britain's Economy

 No   Government   can   deliver
 freedom   without   creating  a                Quick Links
 sound  and sustainable economy,
 in  which business  can thrive,       - A Competitive and
 the  environment is safeguarded                Sound Economy
 and   employees   are  properly     - Open and Honest
 protected,    nationally    and                Taxes
 internationally.

 Liberal Democrats will:
                                          
-   Create a  competitive
 and  sound  economy  to deliver       Strengthen the independence
 prosperity for all                    of the Bank of England. The
                                       Liberal Democrats were the
-   Enable  British  Euro      only party to propose
                                       independence for the Bank at
 entry,  subject to the decision       the last election. Labour
 of  the  British  people  in  a       adopted our proposal, but we
 referendum                            would go further. We will
                                       make members of the Monetary
-]     Make  taxation   and     Policy Committee more
 spending  policies  clearer and       independent by giving them
 more accountable                      non-renewable terms and
                                       making them more
- Strengthen the               representative of the UK as a
                                       whole. We will also make the
 independence  of  the  Bank  of       appointments system more open
 England                               and transparent.

 The Conservatives were
 incompetent   stewards  of  the              
 British  economy.  The Thatcher
 and  Major years went from boom       Greening the Budget
 to bust to boom and bust again.       We will publish a full 'Green
 While some made their fortunes,       Budget' assessment of every
 sectors  of the economy such as       budget. This will ensure that
 manufacturing    and    farming       environmental priorities are
 suffered  a steady decline. The       at the heart of government
 Conservatives  failed  to  make       spending plans, and that the
 the  public  investment  needed       Chancellor is held to account
 for  the  long  term,  starving       for making economic policy
 schools,   training   and   the       more sustainable.
 transport system.
                                       Making the Polluter Pay
 Labour  has done  too little to       We regard it as essential to
 redress  the  mistakes  of  the       make a major shift in
 Conservatives.  They  were  too       taxation from 'goods' like
 timid   in  their  first  three       wealth creation which benefit
 years   in  power,  failing  to       Britain to 'bads' which are
 recognise  the very  poor state       harmful like pollution. We
 of the public sector.                 also want to support green
                                       technology and new
      Open and Honest Taxes            environmental industries. We
                                       will establish a Green Tax
 Schools,   hospitals,  pensions       Commission to make clear
 and the police desperately need       recommendations on reforming
 further investment, and this is       the tax system, guaranteeing
 our priority. We will be honest       that increases in
 about the cost of the                 environmental taxes will be
 investment  we wish to make and       matched by tax cuts
 clear  about the  benefits this       elsewhere. Green taxation
 will bring. We will:                  will involve taxing
                                       differently, not taxing more.
 Provide improvements in
 education  costing more than £3
 billion   a  year,   funded  by
 putting  one penny on the basic
 rate of income tax.

 Provide  substantial  immediate
 increases in pensions and raise
 investment  in the  NHS, funded
 by  setting a new  top tax rate
 of  50% on income over £100,000
 a year and by closing loopholes
 in  Capital  Gains Tax.  To put
 this  measure into perspective,
 for  most of the Thatcher years
 the  top rate was 60%, starting
 on substantially lower incomes.

 Invest in the police and public
 transport  by closing loopholes
 in  Capital Gains Tax (CGT). We
 will  abolish the CGT exemption
 on  capital gains held at death
 and  abolish  the  complex  CGT
 taper   introduced   by  Gordon
 Brown, but maintain the present
 exemptions     for    transfers
 between spouses, and
 reintroduce    indexation   and
 retirement relief

 Send  each household  an annual
 Citizen's  Tax  Contract.  This
 would  show in simple terms how
 much  tax is being raised, what
 services  are  being  delivered
 and why changes have been made.
 It would oblige central
 government  to provide the kind
 of information about
 expenditure  and taxation which
 local  government already sends
 out  with  Council  Tax  bills.
 People  will  have  a  right to
 know  how their taxes are being
 used and why.

 Make  taxation  and spending  policies clearer  and more  accountable. We
 will  require  an annual  Fiscal Assessment  to  be published  sixty days
 before  every  budget by  the Monetary  Policy Committee  of the  Bank of
 England.  It would set out  the current effect of  tax policy on interest
 rates,  and the anticipated  impact in  the year ahead  of existing plans
 and  likely alternatives. This would  make fiscal policy more transparent
 and open.

 Promote better  value for money. Too many government programmes have been
 introduced  in the  past without  proper analysis  of pilot  projects. We
 will  use evidence-based policy making to  give the taxpayer better value
 for money.

 As resources allow, we plan to:

 Give  taxpayers greater  choice over  how taxes  are spent.  Taxpayers in
 each  of  the  nations of  the  UK will  be  given a  series of  specific
 investment options  and will be able to express their choice by returning
 a  tear-off slip  from their annual  P60 forms.  They would be  given the
 opportunity,  say, to choose to  give 1% of income  tax (currently around
 £1  billion)  money  to  hospitals  or  schools.  This  measure  will  be
 introduced  when  revenues allow  following consultation  between  the UK
 government and the nations and regions of the UK.

 Remove taxation  for the lowest paid. We believe that people start paying
 tax at  too low an income and will work to  reduce the burden of taxation
 on  the low  paid. Over time,  we will cut  the 10p  tax rate to  zero so
 nobody  pays any  tax on their  earnings up  to £6,500. At  present, this
 would  take 1.4 million  people on  low incomes (1.1 million  of whom are
 women) out  of tax altogether. Anyone earning less than £25,000 would pay
 less tax - even allowing for our 1p on education.

                      A Competitive and Sound Economy
 Labour have  been timid over the euro, leaving manufacturing, farming and
 tourism  to suffer the  effects of  an uncompetitively high  value of the
 pound. We will:

 Improve  the  infrastructure of  the nations  and regions  of the  UK. We
 would  allow the  Scottish Parliament,  the National Assembly  for Wales,
 the Northern  Ireland Assembly, the English regions and local authorities
 to  borrow  for investment  directly from  the  market, subject  to rules
 similar   to   those   already   established   for  central   government.

 Create  a  competitive and  sound  economy, enabling  British euro  entry
 subject  to   the  decision  of  the  British  people  in  a  referendum.
 Membership of  the euro at a competitive and sustainable rate would offer
 Britain   considerable  benefits.   It  would   end  the   exchange  rate
 instability  which has  destroyed many  thousands of jobs,  safeguard the
 investment  in hundreds of  thousands of further jobs  by overseas firms,
 and  reduce  the costs  of trade  with  the rest  of  the EU.  Unlike the
 Conservatives,  we believe the British  people deserve the opportunity to
 have their say in a referendum.

 Encourage   sustainable   economic  development.   We  will   give  local
 authorities  greater powers to  borrow and invest  for local development,
 encourage  the use  of local  exchange and  trading systems,  and promote
 volunteering.
